The world’s history contains no chapter more striking and attractive
than that comprising the narrative of Spanish conquest in the Americas.
Teeming with interest to the historian and philosopher, to the lover of
daring enterprise and marvellous adventure it is full of fascination. On
the vast importance of the discovery of a western hemisphere, vying in
size, as it one day, perhaps, may compete in civilisation and power,
with its eastern rival, it were idle to expatiate. But the manner of its
conquest commands unceasing admiration. It needs the concurring
testimony of a host of chroniclers and eye-witnesses to convince
succeeding generations that the hardships endured, the perils
surmounted, the victories obtained, by the old Conquistadores of Mexico
and Peru, were as real as their record is astounding. The subjugation of
vast and populous empires by petty detachments of adventurers, often
scantily provided and ignorantly led--the extraordinary daring with
which they risked themselves, a few score strong, into the heart of
unknown countries, and in the midst of hostile millions, require strong
confirmation to obtain credence. Exploits so romantic go near to realise
the feats of those fabulous paladins who, cased in impervious steel and
wielding enchanted lance, overthrew armies as easily as a Quixote
scattered merinos. Hardly, when the tale is put before us in the quaint
and garrulous chronicle of an Oviedo or a Zarate, can we bring ourselves
to accept it as history, not as the wild invention of imaginative monks,
beguiling conventual leisure by the composition of fantastical romance.
And the man who undertakes, at the present day, to narrate in all their
details the exploits and triumphs of a Cortés or a Pizarro, allots
himself no slight task. A clear head and a sound judgment, great
industry and a skilful pen, are needed to do justice to the subject; to
extract and combine the scraps of truth buried under mountains of
fiction and misrepresentation, to sift facts from the partial accounts
of Spanish jurists and officials, and to correct the boastful
misrepresentations of insolent conquerors. The necessary qualities have
been found united in the person of an accomplished American author.
Already favourably known by his histories of the eventful and chivalrous
reign of Ferdinand and Isabella, and of the exploits of the Great
Marquis and his iron followers, Mr Prescott has added to his
well-merited reputation by his narrative of the Conquest of Peru. In its
compilation he has spared no pains. Private collections and public
libraries, the archives of Madrid and the manuscripts of the Escurial,
he has ransacked and collated. And he has been so scrupulously
conscientious as to send to Lima for a copy of the portrait whose
engraving faces his title-page. But although his materials had to be
procured from many and distant countries, their collection appears to
have occasioned him less trouble than their abundance. The comrades and
contemporaries of Pizarro were afflicted with a scribbling mania. They
have left masses of correspondence, of memoranda and personal diaries,
contradictory of each other, often absurd in their exaggerations and
childish in their triviality. From this farrago has Mr Prescott had to
cull,--a labour of no trifling magnitude, whose result is most
creditable to him. And to our admiration of his talents are added
feelings of strong sympathy, when we read his manly and affecting
account of the painful circumstances under which the work was done.
Deprived by an accident of the sight of one eye, the other has for years
been so weak as at times to be useless to him for all purposes of
reading and writing. At intervals he was able to read print several
hours a-day, but manuscript was far more trying to his impaired vision,
and writing was only possible through those aids by which even the
stone-blind may accomplish it. But when he could read, although only by
daylight, he felt, he says, satisfied with being raised so nearly to a
level with the rest of his species. Unfortunately the evil increases.
“The sight of my eye has become gradually dimmed, whilst the sensibility
of the nerve has been so far increased, that for several weeks of the
last year I have not opened a volume, and through the whole time I have
not had the use of it, on an average, for more than an hour a-day.”
Sustained by love of letters, and assisted by readers and amanuenses,
the student and scholar has triumphed over these cruel disadvantages,
surmounted all obstacles, and produced three long and important
historical works, conspicuous by their impartiality, research, and
elegance; entitling him to an exceedingly honourable position amongst
writers in the English tongue, and to one of the very loftiest places in
the as yet scantily filled gallery of American men of letters. The last
of these works, of which Pizarro is the hero and Peru the scene, yields
nothing in merit or interest to its predecessors.

The discovery of America infected Europe with a fever of exploration.
Scarce a country was there, possessing a sea-frontier, whence
expeditions did not proceed with a view to appropriate a share of the
spoils and territory of the new-found _El-Dorado_. In these ventures
Spain, fresh from her long and bloody struggle with the Moor, and
abounding in fierce unsettled spirits, eager for action and adventure,
took a prominent part. The conquests of Cortes followed hard upon the
discoveries of Columbus: Dutch, English, and Portuguese pushed their
investigations in all directions; and, in less than thirty years from
its first discovery, the whole eastern coast of both Americas was
explored from north to south. The vast empire of Mexico was added to the
Spanish crown, and the mother country was glutted and intoxicated by the
Pactolus that flowed from this new possession. But enterprise was not
yet exhausted, or thirst of gold satiated, and Balboa’s discovery of the
Pacific gave fresh stimulus to both. Rumour had long spoken of lands, as
yet untrodden by European foot, where the precious metals were abundant
and worthless as the sand upon the sea-beach. Years elapsed before any
well-directed attempt was made to reach these golden shores. With a view
to discovery and traffic in the Pacific, a settlement was made on the
southern side of the Isthmus of Darien, and the town of Panama was
built. But the armaments that were fitted out took a westerly direction,
in hopes to realise a fixed idea of the Spanish government relative to
an imaginary strait intersecting the Isthmus. At last an expedition
sailed southwards, but soon returned, owing to the bad health of its
commander. This was in 1522. The moment and the man had not yet arrived.
They came, two years later; Pizarro appeared, and Peru was discovered.

But the discovery was comparatively a trifling matter. There lay the
long line of coast, stretching south-eastwards from Panama; the
navigator disposed to explore it, had but to spread his sails, keep the
land in sight, and take the risk of the hidden shoals and reefs that
might lie in his course. The seas to be crossed were often tempestuous;
the country intervening between St Michael’s Gulf and the southern
empire, whose rumoured wealth and civilisation wrought so potently upon
Spanish imagination, was peopled by fierce and warlike tribes.
Shipwreck was to be dreaded, and a landing might for weeks or months be
unsafe, if not impracticable. But what were such secondary dangers
contrasted with the perils, doubly terrible from their unknown and
mysterious nature, incurred by the sanguine Genoese and his bold
companions, when they turned their brigantine’s prow westward from
Europe, and sailed--they knew not whither? Here the path was
comparatively plain, and the goal ascertained; and although risks must
be dared, reward was tolerably certain: for further tidings of the
Peruvian empire had reached the ears of the Spaniards, less shadowy and
incomplete than the vague hints received by Balboa from an Indian chief.
Andagoya, the officer whom illness had compelled to abandon an
expedition when it was scarcely commenced, had brought back intelligence
far more explicit, obtained from Indian traders who had penetrated by
land into the empire of the Incas, as far (so he says in his own
manuscript, comprised in Navarrete’s collection) as its capital city of
Cuzco. They spoke of a pagan but civilised land, opulent and
flourishing; they described the divisions of its provinces, the wealth
of its cities, the manners and usages of its inhabitants. But had their
description been far more minute and glowing, the imagination of those
who received the accounts would still have outstripped reality and
possibility. Those were the days of golden visions and chimerical
day-dreams. In the fancy of the greedy and credulous Spaniards, each
corner of the New World contained treasures, compared to which the
golden trees and jewelled fruits of Aladdin’s garden were paste and
tinsel. The exaggerated reports of those adventurers who returned
wealth-laden to Spain, were swoln by repetition to dimensions which
enchantment only could have realised. No marvels were too monstrous and
unwieldy for the craving gullet of popular credulity. “They listened
with attentive ears to tales of Amazons, which seemed to revive the
classic legends of antiquity, to stories of Patagonian giants, to
flaming pictures of an _El-Dorado_, where the sands sparkled with gems,
and golden pebbles as large as birds’ eggs were dragged in nets out of
the rivers.” And expeditions were actually undertaken in search of a
magical Fountain of Health, of golden sepulchres and temples. The
Amazons and the water of life are still to be discovered; but as to
golden temples and jewelled sands, their equivalents, at least, were
forthcoming,--not for the many, but for a chosen and lucky few. Of the
fortunes of these the record is preserved; of the misfortunes of those
comparatively little is told us. We hear of the thousands of golden
_castellanos_ that fell to the lot of men, who a moment previously, were
without a maravedi in their tattered pouches; we find no catalogue of
the fever-stricken victims who left their bones in the noxious districts
of Panama and Castillo de Oro. And those who achieved riches, earned
them hardly by peril and privation, although, in the magnificence of the
plunder, past sufferings were quickly forgotten. Thrice did Pizarro and
his daring companions sail southward; countless were their hardships,
bitter their disappointments, before the sunshine of success rewarded
their toils, revealing to them treasures that must in some degree have
appeased even _their_ appetite for lucre. They came suddenly upon a town
whose inhabitants, taken by surprise, fled in consternation, abandoning
their property to the invaders. It was the emerald region, and great
store of the gems fell into the hands of the Spaniards. Pizarro had one
as large as a pigeon’s egg. A quantity of crowns and other ornaments,
clumsily fashioned, but of pure gold and silver, were more to the taste
of the ignorant conquerors, who were sceptical as to the value of the
jewels. “Many of them,” says Pedro Pizarro, whose rough, straightforward
account of the discovery and conquest of Peru is frequently quoted by Mr
Prescott, “had emeralds of great value; some tried them upon anvils,
striking them with hammers, saying that if they were genuine, they would
not break; others despised them, and affirmed that they were glass.” A
cunning monk, one of the missionaries whom Pizarro had been ordered by
the Spanish government to take out in his ships, encouraged this
opinion, in order to buy up the emeralds as their market value declined.
The specie, however, was of immense amount, if the authority just quoted
may be depended upon. He talks of two hundred thousand _castellanos_,
the commercial value of which was equivalent to more than half a million
sterling. This from one village, of no great size or importance. It was
a handsome earnest of future spoils, and of the mountain of gold which,
as an Inca’s ransom, awaited the Spaniards at Cuzco.

In these days, when the rumoured existence of a land previously unknown
provokes expeditions authorised and fitted out by half the maritime
powers of Europe, and when great nations risk the peace of the world for
the possession of a paltry Pacific islet, the small degree of vigour
shown by the Spanish crown in pushing its American discoveries fills us
with surprise. Take Peru as an instance. The isthmus of Darien was
colonised by Spaniards; Mexico was theirs, and the armaments sent by
Pedrarias from Panama to explore in a north-westerly direction, had met
at Honduras the conquerors of the Aztecs, the brave and fortunate
companions of Hernan Cortés. One empire had received the Spanish yoke;
at Panama the foot of the European was on the threshold of another; but
there it paused, desirous, yet fearing, to proceed. No aid or
encouragement to enterprise was afforded from Spain; it was left to
private capital and individual daring further to extend colonies already
so vast. A priest found the money; two veteran soldiers, of low
extraction, desperate fortunes, and brave spirit, undertook the risk.
The most remarkable of the three men who thus formed a partnership for
the conquest of kingdoms, could neither read nor write, was
illegitimate, and a foundling. “He was born in Truxillo,” says Gomara,
in his _Historia de las Indias_; “was left at the door of a church, and
for a certain number of days he sucked a sow, none being willing to give
him milk.” Young Pizarro subsequently requited this porcine nourishment
by taking care of his foster-mother’s relatives. The chief occupation of
his youth was that of a swineherd. Gomara’s account of his birth,
however, is only one of many, various and contradictory in their
details. The fact is that very little is known of the early years of
Francisco Pizarro. His valour and soldierly qualities he doubtless
inherited from his father, a Spanish colonel of infantry, who served
with distinction in Italy and Navarre. Neither from him nor from his
mother, a person of low condition, did he receive much parental
attention. Even the date of his birth is a matter of doubt, and has been
differently stated by different chroniclers. He cannot, however, have
been far from fifty when he started on his Peruvian expedition. During
the fourteen previous years he had followed the fortunes of Ojeda,
Balboa, and other Spanish-American adventurers, until at last the
opportunity offered for himself to assume a command to which he proved
in every way competent. His rank was that of captain, and the number of
men under his orders made but a slender company, when, in the month of
November 1524, he left the port of Panama, on board a small vessel,
indifferently provided, and of no great seaworthiness. About a hundred
adventurers, (some accounts say eighty, others a hundred and twenty,)
stalwart, stout-hearted fellows, for the most part of no very reputable
description, composed the powerful army destined to invade a populous
empire. They started under many disadvantages. Almagro, Pizarro’s
partner in the undertaking, who was to follow in another ship, as soon
as it could be got ready, had had the victualling of that on which his
colleague embarked, and he had performed the duty in a slovenly manner,
reckoning that, upon a coasting voyage, supplies might be obtained from
shore. Landing for this purpose, a few leagues south of the river Biru,
Pizarro could procure nothing besides wood and water. A tremendous storm
came on; for ten days the ship was in imminent danger, tossed by the
furious waves; rations ran short, and two ears of Indian corn were each
man’s daily allowance. Thus poorly nourished, and in a crazy ship, they
struggled with desperate energy against the fury of the tropical
tempest. Only a miracle, as it seemed, could save them, and yet they
escaped. The vessel bore Pizarro and his fortunes.

This first expedition, however, resulted in nothing, except much
suffering and discontent. On landing, after the storm, the voyagers
found themselves in a desolate and unproductive country, covered with
tangled forests, untenanted even by beasts or birds. No living creatures
were visible, except noxious insects--no food was obtainable, save herbs
and berries, unpalatable, and often poisonous. The men desponded, and
would fain have returned to Panama; but Pizarro, with much difficulty,
appeased their murmurs, and sending back the ship to the Isle of Pearls
for provisions, attempted to explore the country. On all sides stretched
a gloomy forest, matted with creepers, and penetrable only with axe in
hand; habitations there were none; the bitter buds of the palm, and an
occasional stranded shell-fish, were the best entertainment offered by
that inhospitable region to the weary and disheartened wanderers, some
of whom actually perished by famine. At last, after many weeks’ misery,
an Indian village was discovered. The Spaniards rushed upon it like
starving wolves upon a sheep-fold, and got a small supply of food,
chiefly maize and cocoa-nuts. Here, also, they received further tidings
of the golden southern realm that had lured them on this luckless
voyage. “Ten days’ journey across the mountains,” the Indians told
Pizarro, “there dwelt a mighty monarch, whose dominions had been invaded
by one still more powerful--the Child of the Sun.” They referred to the
kingdom of Quito, which the warlike Inca, Huayna Capac, had added, some
thirty years previously, to the empire of Peru.

Six long weeks of hunger and misery had elapsed, when the ship returned
with good store of provisions. Revived by the seasonable supply, the
adventurers were now as eager to prosecute their voyage as they shortly
before had been to abandon it; and leaving Famine Port, the name given
by Pizarro to the scene of their sufferings, they again sailed
southwards. When next they landed, it was to plunder an Indian village
of its provisions and gold. Here they found traces of cannibalism. “In
the pots for the dinner, which stood upon the fire,” says Herrera, in
his _Historia General de las Indias_, “amongst the flesh which they took
out, were feet and hands of men, whence they knew that those Indians
were Caribs,”--the Caribs being the only cannibals as yet known in that
part of the New World. This discovery drove the horrified Spaniards to
their ships, from which they again landed at Punto Quemado, the limit of
this first expedition. The sturdy resistance they there met from some
warlike savages, in a skirmish with whom they had two men killed and
many wounded, (Pizarro himself receiving seven wounds,) made them
reflect on the temerity of proceeding further with such a scanty force.
Their ship, too, was in a crippled state, and in a council of war it was
decided to return to Panama, and seek the countenance and assistance of
the governor for the further prosecution of the enterprise.

Without attempting to follow Mr Prescott through his detailed and
interesting account of Pizarro’s difficulties, struggles, and
adventures, during the six years that intervened between his first
departure from Panama, and his commencement of the conquest of Peru, we
will glance at the character and deeds of a few of his comrades. The
principal of these was Diego de Almagro, a brave and honourable soldier,
who placed a confidence in his leader which the sequel shows was
scarcely merited. A foundling like Pizarro, like him he was uneducated,
and unable to sign his name to the singular covenant by which the two,
in concert with Father Luque, (the Spanish ecclesiastic, who found the
funds for the expedition,) agreed, upon oath, and in the name of God and
the Holy Evangelists, to divide amongst them in equal shares, all the
lands, treasures, gold, silver, precious stones, and other property,
that might accrue as the result of their enterprise. For in such terms
“three obscure individuals coolly carved out, and partitioned amongst
themselves, an empire of whose extent, power, and resources, of whose
situation, of whose existence even, they had no sure and precise
knowledge.” Contented at first with the post of second in command, it
does not appear whether it was on his own solicitation that Almagro was
named by the governor of Panama Pizarro’s equal in the second
expedition. This domination greatly mortified Pizarro, who suspected
Almagro of having sought it, and did not neglect, when the opportunity
offered, on his visit to the court of Charles the Fifth, to repay him in
kind. As far as can be gathered from the mass of conflicting evidence,
Almagro was frank in disposition and straightforward in his dealings,
but hasty in temper, and of ungovernable passions. When he had
despatched Pizarro on the first voyage, he lost the least possible time
in following him, tracing his progress by the concerted signal of
notches on the trees. In this manner he descended the coast to Punto
Quemado, and in his turn had a fight with the natives, whose village he
burned, and drove them into the woods. In this affair he lost an eye by
a javelin wound. Passing Pizarro’s vessel without observing it, he
pushed on to the mouth of the river San Juan, whence he returned to
Panama, having gone farther, suffered less, and collected more gold than
his friend. At this time, however, great amity and mutual reliance
existed between them; although not long afterwards we find them
quarrelling fiercely, and only prevented by the interposition of their
subordinates from settling their differences sabre in hand.

Bartholomew Ruiz, an Andalusian pilot, a native of that village of
Moguer which supplied Columbus with many seamen for his first voyages,
also played an important part in the earlier researches of the
discoverers of Peru. Upon the second voyage, when the two ships had
reached the river of San Juan, he was detached in one of them to explore
the coast, and soon made the little island of Gallo, in two degrees of
north latitude. The hostile demonstrations of the natives prevented his
landing, and he continued his course southwards, along a coast crowded
with spectators. “They stood gazing on the vessel of the white man, as
it glided smoothly into the crystal waters of the bay, fancying it, says
an old writer, some mysterious being descended from the skies.” The
account of Ruiz’s voyage, although it occupied but a few weeks, and was
comparatively devoid of adventure, has a romantic and peculiar charm.
The first European who, sailing in that direction on the Pacific,
crossed the equinoctial line, he was also the first who obtained ocular
proof of Peruvian civilisation. He fell in with a _balsa_ or native
raft, consisting of beams lashed together, floored with reeds, guided by
a rude rudder and rigged with a cotton square-sail. On board this
primitive craft--still in use on the rivers and coasts of South
America--were several Indians, whose dresses and ornaments, showing
great ingenuity and progress in manufacturing art, excited his surprise
and admiration. “Mirrors mounted in silver,” says a Spanish narrator of
Ruiz’s cruise, “and cups, and other drinking vessels, blankets of cotton
and wool, and shirts, and vests, and many other garments, embroidered
for the most part with very rich embroideries of scarlet, and crimson,
and blue, and yellow, and all other colours, in various designs and
figures of birds and animals, and fishes and trees; and they had small
scales, in the fashion of a steelyard, for weighing gold; and many other
things.” Right musical to the ears of the Spaniards were the tales these
Indians told of the abundance of the precious metals in the palaces of
their king. Wood, according to their report, was scarcely more plentiful
than silver and gold. And they enlarged upon the subject, until their
auditors hardly dared credit the flattering accounts which, as they were
soon to find, little exceeded the truth. Detaining a few of the Indians,
that they might repeat their tale to Pizarro and serve as interpreters
after they should have acquired the Spanish tongue, Ruiz prosecuted his
voyage to about half a degree south of the line, and then returned to
the place where his commander and comrades anxiously awaited him.

As pilot and navigator, old Ruiz rendered eminent services, and his
courage and fidelity were equal to his nautical skill. In the former
qualities another of Pizarro’s little band, Pedro de Candia, a Greek
cavalier, was no way his inferior, although his talents were rather of
a military than a maritime cast. Soon after the return of Ruiz to the
river San Juan, Almagro, who had been to Panama for a reinforcement,
made his appearance with recruits and stores. The pilot’s report
inspired all with enthusiasm, and “Southward, ho!” was again the cry.
They reached the shores of Quito, and anchored off the port of Tacamez.
Before them lay a large and rich town, whose population glittered with
gold and jewels. Instead of the dark swamps and impervious forests where
they had left the bones of so many of their companions, the adventurers
beheld groves of sandal and ebony extending to the very margin of the
ocean; maize and potato fields, and cocoa plantations, gave promise of
plenty; the streams washed down gold-dust, and on the banks of one were
quarries of emeralds. This charming scene brought water into the mouths
of the Spaniards; but their wishes were not yet to be fulfilled; with
the cup at their lips, they were forbidden to taste. A numerous array of
armed and resolute natives set them at defiance. And that they did so,
speaks highly for their courage, when we consider the notion they
entertained of the party of horsemen who, with Pizarro at their head,
effected a landing. Like the Mexicans and other races to whom the horse
was unknown until introduced from Europe, they imagined man and beast to
form one strange and unaccountable monster, and had, therefore, the same
excuse for a panic that a European army would have if suddenly assailed
by a regiment of flying dragons. Nevertheless they boldly charged the
intruders. These, feeling their own inability to cope with the army of
warriors that lined the shore, and which numbered, according to some
accounts, fully ten thousand men, had landed with the sole purpose of
seeking an amicable conference. Instead of a peaceful parley, they found
themselves forced into a very unequal fight. “It might have gone hard
with the Spaniards, hotly pressed by their resolute enemy, but for a
ludicrous incident reported by the historians as happening to one of the
cavaliers. This was a fall from his horse, which so astonished the
barbarians, who were not prepared for the division of what seemed one
and the same being into two, that, filled with consternation, they fell
back, and left a way open for the Christians to regain their vessels.”

Doubting not that the account they could now give of the riches of Peru,
would bring crowds of volunteers to their standard, Almagro and some of
his companions again sailed for Panama, to seek the succours so greatly
needed; Pizarro consenting, after some angry discussion, to await their
return upon the island of Gallo. The men who were to remain with him
were highly discontented at their commander’s decision, and one of them
secreted a letter in a ball of cotton, sent, as a sample of Peruvian
produce, to the wife of the governor of Panama. In this letter were
complaints of privations and misery, and bitter attacks upon Pizarro and
Almagro, whom the disaffected soldiers represented as sacrificing their
comrades’ lives to their own ambition. The paper reached its
destination; the governor was indignant and sent ships to fetch away the
whole party. But Pizarro, encouraged by letters from his two partners,
who promised him the means of continuing his voyage, steadily refused to
budge. With his sword he drew a line upon the sand from east to west,
exposed, with a soldier’s frugality of words, the glory and prosperity
that awaited them in Peru, and the disgrace of abandoning the
enterprise, and then, stepping across the line, bade brave men stay by
him and recreants retreat. Thirteen were stanch to their courageous
leader. The first to range himself by his side was the pilot Ruiz; the
second was Pedro de Candia. The names of the eleven others have also
been preserved by the chroniclers.

“A handful of men, without food, without clothing, almost without arms,
without knowledge of the land to which they were bound, without vessels
to transport them, were here left upon a lonely rock in the ocean, with
the avowed purpose of carrying on a crusade against a powerful empire,
staking their lives on its success. What is there in the legends of
chivalry that surpasses it? This was the crisis of Pizarro’s fate....
Had Pizarro faltered from his strong purpose, and yielded to the
occasion now so temptingly presented for extricating himself and his
broken band from their desperate position, his name would have been
buried with his fortunes, and the conquest of Peru would have been left
for other and more successful adventurers.”

Courage and constancy had their reward. True to their word, Luque and
Almagro sent a small vessel to take off Pizarro and his little band.
They embarked, set sail, and after twenty days were in the gulf of
Guayaquil, abreast of Chimborazo, and in full view of the fertile vale
of Tumbez. There an Inca noble came on board, and was received by
Pizarro with all honour and distinction. In reply to his inquiries
concerning the whence and wherefore of the white men’s coming, the
Spanish leader replied, “that he was the vassal of a great prince, the
greatest and most powerful in the world, and that he had come to this
country to assert his master’s _lawful supremacy over it_.” He further
announced his intention of rescuing them from the darkness of unbelief,
and converting them to Christianity. In reply to these communications
the Inca chief said nothing--all, perhaps, that he understood. He was
much more favourably impressed by a good dinner, Spanish wine, and the
present of an iron hatchet. The next day one of Pizarro’s followers,
Alonzo de Molina by name, was sent on shore with a propitiatory offering
of pigs and poultry for the _curaca_ or governor of the district. He
brought back such marvellous accounts that he was set down as a liar;
and Pedro de Candia was selected to bring a true report of things on
shore, whither he was sent, “dressed in complete mail as became a good
knight, with his sword by his side, and his arquebuse on his shoulder.”
His brilliant equipment greatly dazzled the Indians, and at the report
of his arquebuse they fell to the ground in dismay. A wondrous story is
gravely told by several chroniclers, how the Indians, taking him for a
supernatural being, and desirous to ascertain the fact beyond a doubt,
let loose a tiger upon him. Candia took a cross from his neck and laid
it upon the back of the animal, which instantly fawned upon and
gambolled round him. On returning to his ship the report of the Greek
cavalier confirmed that of Molina. Both, as it subsequently appeared,
were guilty of some exaggeration. But their flaming accounts of temples
tapestried with plates of gold, and of convent gardens where fruits and
vegetables were all in pure gold and silver, gave heart to the
adventurers, and sent them on their way rejoicing. To the port of Santa,
nine degrees farther south than any previous expedition had reached,
they continued their voyage; and then, having fully convinced themselves
of the richness of the country, and the importance of their discoveries,
but, being too few and feeble to profit by them, they retraced their
course to, Panama, and arrived there, after an, absence of eighteen
months, early in the year 1528.

It was now that Pizarro, finding the governor of Panama unwilling to
assist him either with men or money, set out for Europe, to lay the
report of his discoveries before the Emperor, and implore his support
and patronage. He had little taste for the mission. The unlettered
soldier, the war-worn and weather-beaten adventurer, was at home on the
deck of a tempest-tost caravel, or, in the depths of a howling
wilderness, where courage, coolness, and fortitude were the qualities
needed; and there he would rather risk himself than in the perfumed
atmosphere of a court. His associates, however, urged him to depart.
Father Luque’s clerical duties prevented him from undertaking the
journey; neither by manners nor appearance was Almagro eligible as an
envoy; Pizarro, although wholly uneducated, was of commanding presence,
and ready, even eloquent, in speech. With honourable frankness and
confidence in his friend’s integrity, Almagro urged him to set out. It
was agreed that Pizarro should solicit for himself the offices of
governor and captain-general of the newly discovered country, for
Almagro that of _adelantado_; that the pilot Ruiz, should be Alguaçil
Mayor, and Father Luque Bishop of Tumbez. Promising to act in conformity
with this agreement, and in all respects to consult his friends’
interests equally with his own, Pizarro, accompanied by Pedro de Candia,
and taking with him some Peruvians and llamas, specimens of cloth and
ornaments of gold and silver, traversed the Isthmus, and embarked for
Spain.

The discoverer and future conqueror of Peru had scarcely set foot upon
his native soil, when he was thrown into prison for a debt of twenty
years’ standing, incurred by him as one of the early colonists of
Darien. Released from durance, so soon as intelligence of his detention
reached the court, he hurried to Toledo, where Charles the Fifth then
was. The records of courts afford no scene more pregnant with interest
than the arrival of Pizarro in the presence of his sovereign. It is the
very romance of history,--a noble subject for either poet or painter.
The great monarch was then in the zenith of his glory and full flush of
his fame. Pavia had been won; the chivalrous king of France made
prisoner. Charles, the hero of his day, was about to enter Italy and
receive an imperial crown from a pontiff’s hand. Engrossed by his own
triumphs and by the spread of his European power and dominions, the
fortunate monarch had scarcely given a thought to the rich conquests
made in his name by obscure adventurers in the golden regions of the
West. The arrival of Hernan Cortés, come to lay an empire at his feet,
had scarcely roused him from his indifference, when, in that brilliant
and martial court, crowded with nobles and grandees, there appeared an
unknown soldier, penniless, almost friendless, the child of shame, but
whose daring deeds and great achievements were soon to give his name a
lustre far above any that gentle birth and lengthy pedigree can bestow.
Wholly unknown, however, Pizarro was not. The tale of researches,
prosecuted, during a period of four years and in the teeth of
innumerable difficulties and dangers, with a perseverance which rumour
said had been rewarded by great discoveries, had reached the ears of
Charles. Pizarro met a gracious reception and patient hearing. Unabashed
before royalty, he spoke with the gravity of a Castilian, and the
dignity of a man conscious of his own worth. And he spoke well--“so
well,” says Montesinos in his annals, “that he secured attention and
applause at Toledo, where the Emperor was, who gave him audience with
much pleasure, treated him lovingly, and heard him tenderly, especially
when he related his constancy and that of his thirteen companions upon
the island, in the midst of so many troubles and hardships.” It is said
that Charles shed tears at the recital of such great sufferings so nobly
supported. Compelled to leave Spain, he recommended Pizarro to the
Council of the Indies; and after some delay, the famous _Capitulacion_
or agreement was drawn up and signed by the queen. By this document
Pizarro received right of conquest and discovery in Peru as far as two
hundred leagues south of Santiago, was made governor, captain-general,
Adelantado and Alguaçil Mayor for life, with a salary of seven hundred
and twenty-five thousand maravedis, and various immunities and
privileges. Almagro was appointed commander of the fortress of Tumbez;
Father Luque got his bishopric; Ruiz was named grand pilot of the
Southern Ocean; Candia received command of the artillery; and on the
eleven others who had remained on the island with Pizarro, the rank of
hidalgo was bestowed, besides the promise of municipal dignities in
Peru, when it should be under the Spanish rule. From this statement, it
is apparent that Pizarro either did not attempt, or failed in his
endeavours, to procure for Almagro and Ruiz the offices he had promised
to solicit for them, and which, on the contrary, were all heaped upon
himself. This treachery, or want of success, was the cause of bad blood
between him and Almagro. Pizarro’s conduct in the affair has been
variously represented by different writers. His kinsman, Pedro Pizarro,
vindicates him from the charge of unfair dealing. “And Don Francisco
Pizarro petitioned in accordance with what had been agreed with his
companions; and in the council he was answered that the government could
not possibly be divided between two persons, for that had been done in
Santa Marta, and one of the two had killed the other.” And Pedro, who
is a bit of partisan, and has a natural leaning to his cousin and
commander, further states, that Pizarro, in honourable fulfilment of his
promise, pleaded urgently for Almagro, till he received a rebuff, and
was told, that if he did not ask the _adelantamiento_ for himself, it
should be given to a stranger. Whereupon he applied for it, and it was
granted him in addition to his other dignities. He was also made a
knight of St Jago; and in the armorial bearings which he inherited by
the father’s side, were introduced the black eagle and the two pillars
emblazoned on the royal arms. A ship, a llama, and an Indian city were
further added; “while the legend announced that under the auspices of
Charles, and by the industry, the genius, and the resources of Pizarro,
Peru had been discovered and reduced to tranquillity.” A premature
announcement, which many subsequent scenes of bloodshed and violence
sadly belied. As regards the good faith kept by Pizarro with Almagro and
his other companions, and the degree of sincerity and perseverance with
which he pressed their claims at the court of Spain, Mr Prescott is
justly sceptical; and much of the conqueror’s after-conduct compels us
to believe that in such solicitations it was one word for his friend and
two for himself. It is less interesting, however, to trace his
dissimulation and double-dealing, and the dissensions resulting from
them, than to accompany him upon his final expedition to the empire of
the Incas.

Although, by the articles of the _capitulacion_, Pizarro was bound to
raise, within six months of its date, a well-equipped force of two
hundred and fifty men, it was with less than three-fourths of that
number that he sailed from Panama in January 1531. Careful to secure an
ample share of the profits of the enterprise, the Spanish government did
nothing to assist it, beyond providing some artillery and a few military
stores. Pizarro must find the funds and the men, and this was no easy
matter. To obtain the latter, he repaired to his native town of Truxillo
in Estremadura, where he recruited a few followers. Amongst them were
four of his brothers--three illegitimate like himself, and one
legitimate, Hernando Pizarro, a man of talent and energy, but of
turbulent and overbearing disposition, who cut an important figure in
the Peruvian campaigns. “They were all poor, and proud as they were
poor,” says Oviedo, who had seen them, “and their eagerness for gain was
in proportion to their poverty.” Consequently the New World was the very
place for them. Many, however, who listened eagerly to Pizarro’s account
of the wealth to be obtained there, hesitated to seek it through the
avenue of perils by which it was to be reached. As to money, those who
had it were loath to invest on such frail security as Peruvian mines;
thus proving themselves wiser in their generation than many in more
recent times. Cortés, it is said, assisted Pizarro to the necessary
funds, which he would hardly have raised without the aid of the Mexican
conqueror; and the stipulated six months having expired, the newly-made
governor of Peru cut his cables, and in all haste left the shores of
Spain, fearing that if the incompleteness of his preparations got wind,
the Spanish crown might recede from its share of the contract. At
Panama, recruits were as reluctant and scarce as in Spain; and at last,
impatient of delay, he started on his expedition with only one hundred
and eighty men and twenty-seven horses. Their equipment, however, was
good; they were well supplied with arms and ammunition, and, above all,
sanguine of success. Before their departure, their banners and the royal
standard were blessed by a Dominican monk, and the soldiers took the
sacrament.

Anchoring after thirteen days’ sail in the Bay of St Matthew, Pizarro
landed his men and marched along the coast. He at first intended not to
disembark till he reached Tumbez, of whose riches and fertility he
entertained a pleasant recollection; but, baffled by winds, he altered
his determination. He had, perhaps, better have adhered to it. True,
that the emeralds and gold found at Coaque encouraged his followers, and
enabled the politic adventurer to make a large remittance to Panama, to
dazzle the colonists and induce volunteers. But the sufferings of the
Spaniards on their march through those sultry and unhealthy regions,
were very great. Encumbered with heavy armour and thick cotton doublets,
they toiled wearily along beneath a burning sun and over sands scarce
less scorching. Fortunately, they were unmolested by the natives, who
fled on their approach. They had enough to do to combat disease and the
climate. “A strange epidemic broke out in the little army; it took the
form of ulcers, or rather of hideous warts of great size, which covered
the body, and when lanced, as was the case with some, discharged such a
quantity of blood as proved fatal to the sufferer.” Mr Prescott
recognises in this horrible malady--which he says made its appearance
during the invasion, and did not long survive it--“one of those plagues
from the vial of wrath, which the destroying angel who follows in the
path of the conqueror pours out on the devoted nations.” Conquerors and
conquered, however, suffered from it alike; and as to its having
speedily become extinct, we suspect that it is still well known in Peru.
The _verrugas_, described by Dr Tschudi in his valuable and delightful
narrative of Peruvian travel, and which the natives attribute to the
noxious qualities of certain streams, is coincident in its symptoms with
the disease that afflicted Pizarro’s followers, diminishing their
numbers and impeding their progress. The arrival of one or two small
reinforcements filled up the vacancies thus made in their ranks, and the
march was continued until the adventurers found themselves opposite the
island of Puná, upon which Pizarro resolved to pitch his camp, and there
plan his attack upon the neighbouring city of Tumbez. Between the
Tumbese and the men of Puná there was a long-standing feud, and the
former lost no opportunity of exciting Pizarro’s suspicions of the
islanders. Having been informed that ten or twelve chiefs were plotting
against him, he seized and delivered them to their rivals, who forthwith
cut off their heads. A battle was the immediate consequence; and the
handful of Spaniards defeated several thousand Puná warriors, mowing
them down with musketry and sabre. As was by no means unusual in those
days, the Christians received encouragement from heaven. “In the
battle,” says Montesinos with laudable gravity, “many, both of our
people and of the Indians, saw that in the air there were two other
camps--one led on by the archangel St Michael with sword and buckler,
the other by Lucifer and his myrmidons; but no sooner did the Castilians
cry victory, than the demons fled, and from out of a mighty whirlwind
terrible voices were heard to exclaim--‘Thou hast conquered! Michael,
thou hast conquered!’ Hence Don Francisco Pizarro was inspired with so
great a devotion to the holy archangel that he vowed to call by his name
the first city he should found, fulfilling the same, as we shall
presently see.” These angelic interventions were common enough both in
the Moorish and American wars of Spain, and have been commemorated by
many artists, whose paintings, for the most part more curious in design
than skilful in execution, are still to be occasionally met with in the
Peninsula. Pizarro was twice favoured with such celestial succours; the
second time at the fight, or rather massacre, of Caxamalca, when
certainly he required little aid against the panic-stricken hordes, who
fell, like grass before the mower’s scythe, under the fierce sabre-cuts
of the martial Spaniards. Nevertheless, “a terrible apparition appeared
in the air during the onslaught. It consisted of a woman and a child,
and at their side a horseman, all clothed in white, on a milk-white
charger,--doubtless the valiant St James,--who, with his sword glancing
lightning, smote down the infidel host, and rendered them incapable of
resistance.” Thus gravely and reverently deposeth the worthy Fray
Naharro, who had his information from three monks of his order present
in the fight.

The arrival of Pizarro and his band upon the coast of Peru, occurred at
a moment most favourable to their projects of appropriation. The country
had just emerged from a sanguinary civil war, in which many of its best
warriors had perished; the throne of the Incas was occupied by a
usurper, who, to cement his power, had shed the blood of hundreds of
the royal family, his own brethren and relatives. These events had been
thus brought about:--The warlike Inca and conqueror of Quito, Huayna
Capac, forgot, on his death-bed, the sagacity that had marked his reign;
and, in direct contravention of the fundamental laws of the empire,
divided his dominions between Huascar, his legitimate heir, and
Atahuallpa, a pet son whom he had had by one of his numerous concubines.
The old Inca died, and, for five years, his two successors reigned,
without quarrel, over their respective territories. Then dissensions
arose between them; war broke out; and in two great fights, one at the
foot of Chimborazo, the other on the plains of Cuzco, Atahuallpa’s
troops, veterans grown gray under his father’s banner, were completely
victorious. Huascar was taken prisoner and shut up in the fortress of
Xauxa; his rival assumed the _borla_ or scarlet diadem of the Incas,
and, using his victory with little moderation, if Garcilasso de la Vega
and subsequent Spanish writers are to be believed, butchered, with
circumstances of great cruelty, all of the Inca blood upon whom he could
lay hands. Mr Prescott, however, doubts the veracity of Garcilasso, the
son of a niece of Huayna Capac and of a Spanish cavalier, who arrived in
Peru, soon after its conquest, in the suite of Pedro de Alvarado. His
origin, and familiarity with the Peruvian tongue, should ensure the
correctness of his statements; whilst his relationship, by the father’s
side, with a family illustrious in letters as in arms, seems to
guarantee his literary capacity. But Garcilasso was sadly given to
romancing; and his pages exhibit, amidst much that is really valuable,
great exaggeration and credulity. If we could implicitly credit his
statements of Atahuallpa’s atrocities, our sympathy with the Inca,
betrayed, dethroned, and finally murdered, by the Spaniards, would be
materially lessened. The triumph of the usurper occurred only a few
months previous to the invasion of Peru by Pizarro, in the spring of
1532.

After the battle of Puná the Spaniards were greatly annoyed by the
enemy, who kept up a desultory and harassing warfare, and they welcomed
with joy the arrival of a strong reinforcement under Hernando de Soto,
the future discoverer of the Mississippi. With a hundred fresh men and a
supply of horses for the cavalry, Pizarro did not hesitate to cross to
the mainland. The inhabitants, although previously on the most friendly
terms with the Spaniards, opposed their landing, but with no great
energy; and a charge of horse drove them to the woods. At Tumbez,
however, a grievous disappointment awaited the invaders. With the
exception of half-a-dozen of the principal buildings, the city was razed
to the ground; and of the rich spoils the Spaniards had reckoned upon,
not a trace was left. The adventurers were greatly discouraged by this
discovery. “The gold of Peru seemed only like a deceitful phantom,
which, after beckoning them on through toil and danger, vanished the
moment they attempted to grasp it.” They lost heart in this search after
an intangible treasure; and Pizarro, fearing disaffection as a
consequence of inaction, hurried them into the interior of the country.
At thirty leagues from Tumbez, he founded, in conformity with his vow,
the city of San Miguel; and, after waiting several weeks for further
reinforcements and receiving none, he left fifty men for the protection
of the new settlement, and marched with the remainder in search of the
Inca, proclaiming every where, as he proceeded, the religion of Christ,
the supremacy of the Pope, and the sovereignty of Charles the Fifth.

And here, as much, perhaps, as at any period of his career, we are
struck by the genius and activity of Pizarro, and by his wonderful
ascendency over a band of restless desperadoes. Within five months after
landing at Tumbez, he had made an extensive tour of observation,
established a friendly understanding with the Indians, parcelled out
lands, cut timber, and quarried stone; founded a city, and organised a
municipal government. A church and a fortress--always the two first
edifices in a Spanish-American town,--a storehouse and a court of
justice, strongly, if not elegantly built, had already arisen. Strict
discipline was maintained amongst the Spaniards, who were forbidden,
under heavy penalties, to molest or ill-treat the natives; and, most
astonishing of all, Pizarro succeeded in persuading his rapacious
followers to relinquish their shares in the gold and silver already
collected, which was sent, after a fifth had been deducted for the
crown, to pay off the ship-owners and those who had supplied stores for
the expedition. After the settlement of these preliminaries, he struck
boldly into the heart of the land. His army (the name is a mockery,
applied to such a force) consisted of sixty-seven cavalry and one
hundred and ten infantry, amongst whom were only three arquebusiers and
twenty crossbowmen. With this paltry troop he dared to advance against
the powerful army which he had ascertained was encamped under command of
Atahuallpa, within twelve days’ journey of San Miguel. We read of
subsequent events and scarcely wonder at a mob of timid Peruvians being
dispersed by a handful of resolute men, mail-clad, well disciplined, and
inured to war, but in numbers as one to a hundred of those opposed to
them. Pizarro, however, had no assurance of the slight resistance he
should meet; he could know but imperfectly the resources of the Inca; he
was wholly ignorant of the natural obstacles the country might oppose to
his progress, and of the ambuscades that might beset his path. His
dauntless spirit paused not for such considerations. And, scanty as his
numbers were, he did not fear to risk their diminution, by a proposal
resembling that of Harry the Fifth to his troops. Those who had no heart
for the expedition, he announced to his little band, on the fifth day
after their departure from San Miguel, were at full liberty to return to
the city. The garrison was weak, he would gladly see it reinforced, and
any who chose to rejoin it should have allotted to them the same share
of land and number of Indian vassals as those Spaniards who had remained
in the settlement.

--“He which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart: his passport shall be made,
And crowns, for convoy, put into his purse.”

Precisely similar to the proclamation of the hero of Agincourt was that
of the conqueror of Peru. He preferred weakening his force, already far
too feeble, to retaining the discontented and pusillanimous. The
contagion of bad example had more terrors for him than the hosts of
Atahuallpa. And he “would not die in that man’s company who _feared_ his
fellowship to die with _him_.” Only nine of his one hundred and
seventy-seven followers availed themselves of the permission, thus
boldly accorded them, to retrace their steps. With the residue Pizarro
resumed his march.

As the Spaniards advanced, their difficulties and uncertainties
increased. Rivers impeded their progress, and they had to construct
bridges and rafts. They passed through well-built towns, where they saw
large magazines of military stores and rations, and along handsome paved
roads, shaded by avenues of trees, and watered by artificial streamlets.
The farther they penetrated into the country, the more convinced they
were of its resources and civilisation, far beyond any thing they had
anticipated, and the more sensible they became of the great temerity of
their enterprise. When they strove to learn the Inca’s intentions and
whereabouts, the contradictory information they obtained added to their
perplexity. The Inca, it was said, was at the head of fifty thousand
men, tranquilly awaiting the appearance of the eight-score intruders who
thus madly ran into the lion’s jaws. This was discouraging enough. And
when the Spaniards reached the foot of the stupendous Andes, which
intervened between them and Caxamalca, and were to be crossed by means
of paths and passes of the most dangerous description, easily defensible
by tens against thousands, their hearts failed them, and many were of
opinion to abandon the original plan and take the road to Cuzco, which
wound along the foot of the mountains, broad, shady, and pleasant.
Pizarro was deaf to this proposal. His eloquence and firmness prevailed,
and the Andes were crossed, with much toil, but without molestation from
the Peruvians.

It is difficult to understand the Inca’s motives in thus neglecting the
many opportunities afforded him of annihilating the Spaniards. His
whole conduct at this time is mysterious and unaccountable, greatly at
variance with the energy and sagacity of which he had given proof in his
administration of the empire, and wars against Huascar. Nothing was
easier than to crush the encroaching foreigners in the defiles of the
Cordilleras, instead of allowing them to descend safely into the plain,
where their cavalry and discipline gave them great advantages. Perhaps
it never occurred to Atahuallpa that so trifling a force could contend
under any circumstances, with a chance of success, against his numerous
army. In their intestine wars, the Peruvians fought with much
resolution. In the battle of Quipayan, which placed the crown of Peru on
Atahuallpa’s head, the fight raged from dawn till sunset, and the
slaughter was prodigious, both parties exhibiting great courage and
obstinacy. And subsequently, in engagements with the Spaniards, proofs
of Peruvian valour were not wanting. After the death of Atahuallpa, on
the march to Cuzco, more than one fierce fight occurred between Spanish
cavalry and Peruvian warriors, in which the former had not always the
advantage. When Cuzco was burned, and siege laid to its fortresses, one
of these was valiantly defended by an Inca noble, whose single arm
struck the assailants from the ramparts as fast as they attained their
summit. And when, several ladders having been planted at once, the
Spaniards swarmed up on all points, and overpowered the last of his
followers, the heroic savage still would not yield. “Finding further
resistance ineffectual, he sprang to the edge of the battlements, and,
casting away his war-club, wrapped his mantle around him and threw
himself headlong from the summit.” Relying on the bravery of his troops,
and considering that the Spaniards, although compact in array, and
formidable by their horses and weapons, were in numbers most
insignificant, it is probable the Inca felt sure of catching and caging
them whenever he chose, and was therefore in no hurry to do it, but,
like a cat with a mouse, chose to play with before devouring them. This
agrees, too, with the account given in an imperfect manuscript, the work
of one of the old conquerors, quoted by Mr Prescott. “Holding us for
very little, and not reckoning that a hundred and ninety men could
offend him, he allowed us to pass through that defile, and through many
others equally bad, because really, as we afterwards knew and
ascertained, his intention was to see us, and question us as to whence
we came, and who had sent us, and what we wanted ... and afterwards to
take our horses and the things that most pleased him, and to sacrifice
the remainder.” These calculations were more than neutralised by the
decision and craft of the white man. Established in Caxamalca, whose ten
thousand inhabitants had deserted the town on his approach, Pizarro
beheld before him “a white cloud of pavilions, covering the ground as
thick as snow-flakes, for the space apparently of several miles.” In
front of the tents were fixed the warriors’ lances; and at night
innumerable watch-fires, making the mountain-slope resemble, says an
eyewitness, “a very starry heaven,” struck doubt and dismay into the
hearts of that little Christian band. “All,” says one of the
Conquistadores, “remaining with much fear, because we were so few, and
had entered so far into the land, where we could not receive succours.”
All, save one, the presiding genius of the venture, who showed himself
equal to the emergency, and nobly justified his followers’ confidence.
Pizarro saw that retreat was impossible, inaction ruinous, and he
resolved to set all upon a cast by executing a project of unparalleled
boldness. The Inca, who, very soon assumed a dictatorial tone, had
ordered the Spaniards to occupy the buildings on the chief square at
Caxamalca, and no others, and had also signified his intention of
visiting the strangers so soon as a fast he was keeping should be at an
end. The, square, or rather triangle, was of great extent, and consisted
of a stone fortress, and of large, low, wide-doored halls, that seemed
intended for barracks. Upon this square Pizarro prepared to receive his
royal visitor.

On the appointed day, Atahuallpa made his appearance, at the head of his
numerous army, variously estimated by Pizarro’s secretary and others
there present, at from thirty to fifty thousand men. These halted at a
short distance from the town; the Inca began to pitch his tents, and
sent word to Pizarro that he had postponed his visit to the following
morning. The Spanish leader deprecated this change of plan, and said
that he fully expected Atahuallpa to sup with him; whereupon the Inca,
either from good nature, or lured by the prospect of a feast, entered
the town with a comparatively small retinue. “He brought with him,” says
Hernando Pizarro, in a manuscript letter, “five or six thousand Indians,
unarmed, save with small clubs, and slings, and bags of stones.” In
fact, it appears from all accounts that very few of them had any arms at
all. Upon a throne of gold, borne on an open litter, by Peruvian nobles
in a rich azure livery, the Inca came, and paused in the square. Not a
Spaniard was to be seen, save Fray Vicente de Valverde, Pizarro’s
chaplain, who, by means of an interpreter, addressed the royal visitor
in a homily which, to judge from the multiplicity of subjects it
embraced, can have been of no trifling length. Beginning with the
creation of the world, he expounded the doctrines of Christianity,
talked of St Peter and the Pope, and finally, with singular coolness,
requested his astonished hearer to change his religion, and become a
tributary of the Emperor. Naturally offended at such presumptuous
propositions, Atahuallpa answered with some heat, and threw down a Bible
or breviary which he had taken from the friar’s hand. The friar hurried
to Pizarro. “Do you not see,” he said, “that whilst we waste our breath
talking to this dog, the fields are filling with Indians? Set on at
once! I absolve you.” Slay! Slay! mass or massacre. The old cry of the
Romish priest, covetous of converts. The sword in one hand, the crucifix
in the other; abjuration of heresy, or the blood of heretics. In
Smithfield and the Cevennes, on the dread eve of St Bartholomew, and
amidst the gentle sun-worshippers of Peru,--such has ever been the maxim
of the ministers of a religion of mercy. In this instance the appeal to
violence was not unheard. Pizarro waved a scarf, a signal gun was fired
from the fort, the barrack doors flew open, and, armed to the teeth, the
Spaniards sprang into the plaza, shouting the fierce slogan before
which, in Granada’s sunny _vega_, the Moslem had so often quailed.
“_Santiago y à ellos!_” St James and at them! was the cry, as the
steel-clad cavalry spurred into the crowd, carving, with trenchant
blade, paths through the confused and terrified Indians; whilst musketry
flashed, and two falconets, placed in the fort, vomited death upon the
mob. The exit from the plaza was soon choked with corpses, and the
living, debarred escape by the bodies of the dead, could but stand and
be slaughtered. The square was soon converted into a shambles.

“Even as they fell, in files they lay,”

slain in cold blood, and innocent of offence. At last “such was the
agony of the survivors under the terrible pressure of their assailants,
that a large body of Indians, by their convulsive struggles, burst
through the wall of stone and dried clay which formed part of the
boundary of the plaza!” And the country was covered with fugitives,
flying before the terrible sweep of the Spanish sabre.

“The Marquis,” says Pedro Pizarro, “called out, saying, ‘Let none wound
the Inca, under pain of his life!’” Atahuallpa was to be made prisoner,
not killed. Around him a faithful few, his nobles and court, fought
desperately to protect their sovereign. Unarmed, they grappled with the
Spaniards, clung to their horses, and tried to drag them from their
saddles. The struggle was of some duration, and night approached when,
several of the palanquin-bearers having been slain, the litter was
overturned, and the Inca fell into the arms of Pizarro and his comrades.
He was carefully secured in an adjacent building, the news of his
capture quickly spread, and the whole Indian army disbanded and fled,
panic-struck at the loss of their sovereign. The number that fell that
day is very variously stated. “They killed them all,” says one
authority, a nephew of Atahuallpa, on whose testimony Mr Prescott
inclines to place reliance, “with horses, with swords, with arquebuses,
as though they were sheep. None made resistance, and out of ten
thousand not two hundred escaped.” This is probably an exaggeration.
Other accounts state the number of dead as far smaller, but there
appears ground to believe that four or five thousand fell. The example
was terrible, and well suited to strike the Peruvians with terror. But
the extermination of the whole Indian army would have been of less
importance than the single captive Pizarro had made, and whom, agreeably
to his promise, he had to sup with him when the fight was done. Deprived
of their sovereign, and viewing with a superstitious awe the audacious
stranger who had dared to lay hands upon his sacred person, the Indians
lost heart, and were no longer to be feared.

The capture of the Inca, although so important and beneficial in its
results, occasioned Pizarro some embarrassment. He was anxious to march
upon the capital, but feared to risk himself on the roads and mountains
with the Inca in his keeping; and as he could not spare a sufficient
guard to leave behind with him, he was compelled to wait patiently for
reinforcements. Atahuallpa, who did not want for penetration, but in the
words of an old manuscript, “was very wise and discreet, a friend of
knowledge, and subtle of understanding,” soon found out that the
Spaniards were at least as eager to accumulate gold as to disseminate
their religion. He offered to buy his liberty, and a room full of gold
was the prodigious ransom he proposed. The length of the apartment he
engaged to fill is variously stated. The most moderate account makes it
twenty-two feet. Hernando Pizarro says it was thirty-five. The width was
seventeen feet, and the gold was to be piled up as high as the Inca
could reach, which was about nine feet from the ground. A smaller room
was to be filled twice with silver. Pizarro having accepted, or allowed
his prisoner to infer that he accepted, this very handsome price for his
liberty, the captive sovereign took measures to collect the stipulated
treasure. Palaces and temples were stripped of their ornaments, and from
distant parts of Peru gold was sent to complete the Inca’s ransom. The
agreement was that it should not be melted, but piled up in the room in
whatever form it arrived, which gave Atahuallpa some advantage. Goblets,
salvers, vases, and curious imitations of plants and animals, were
amongst the heterogeneous contributions that soon began to rise high
upon the floor of the Inca’s prison. “Among the plants, the most
beautiful was the Indian corn, in which the golden ear was sheathed in
its broad leaves of silver, from which hung a rich tassel of threads of
the same precious metal. A fountain was also much admired, which sent up
a sparkling jet of gold, while birds and animals of the same metal
played in the waters at the base.” But the greedy conquerors grew
impatient, and thought the gold came too slowly, although on some days a
value of fifty or sixty thousand _castellanos_ was added to the store.
Rumours of a rising of the Peruvians were spread abroad, and Atahuallpa
was accused of conspiring against the Spaniards. These, and especially a
strong reinforcement that had arrived under Almagro’s orders, became
clamorous for the Inca’s death. They had already divided all that had
arrived of his ransom, equivalent to the enormous sum of three millions
and a half sterling, besides fifty thousand marks of silver. At last the
Inca was brought to trial on the most absurd charges, “having reference
to national usages, or to his personal relations, over which the Spanish
conquerors had no jurisdiction.” Thus, he was accused of idolatry and
adultery, and of _squandering the public revenues, since the conquest of
the country by the Spaniards_! His death, in short, was decreed, and his
butchers were not very nice about the pretext. It was found expedient to
get rid of him; and under such circumstances a reason to condemn is as
easily found as a rope to hang. Some few honest and humane men there
were in the court, who rejected the false evidence brought before them,
and denied the authority of the tribunal. But their objections were
overruled, and they had to content themselves with entering a protest
against proceedings which they justly held to be arbitrary and illegal.
Father Valverde was not one of those who leaned to mercy’s side. A copy
of the sentence, condemning Atahuallpa to be burned alive, was
submitted to him for his signature, which he gave with alacrity,
convinced, he said, that the Inca deserved death. Why, it is hard to
say, at least at the hands of the Spaniards. But the whole of the
circumstances connected with his mock trial and subsequent execution are
a disgrace to the conquerors of Peru, an eternal blot upon the memory of
Francisco Pizarro. To avoid the flames, Atahuallpa embraced
Christianity, and was executed by strangulation, after being duly
baptised and shriven by the clerical scoundrel Valverde. Previously he
had begged hard for his life, offering twice the ransom he had already
paid, and guarantees for the safety of the Spaniards. “What have I done,
or my children,” said the unfortunate monarch, “that I should meet such
a fate? And from your hands, too,” added he to Pizarro--“you, who have
met friendship and kindness from my people, with whom I have shared my
treasures, who have received nothing but benefits from my hands.” Adding
hypocrisy to cruelty, Pizarro affected emotion. In its sincerity we
cannot believe, or that he could not, had he chosen, have saved
Atahuallpa. “I myself,” says Pedro Pizarro, ever his cousin’s eulogist
and advocate, “saw the Marquis weep.” We believe Pedro lies, or was
mistaken, or that the tears were of the sort called crocodile’s. We have
no faith in the tenderness of the stern and iron-hearted conqueror of
Peru.

Although the Inca’s ransom had not been made up to the full amount
promised, Pizarro had acquitted his prisoner, some time previously to
his death, of any further obligation on that score. With respect to this
ransom, Dr Tschudi gives some interesting particulars, doubtless true in
the main, although exaggerated in the details. “The gold which the Inca
got together in Caxamarca and the neighbourhood, was hardly sufficient
to fill half the room. He therefore sent messengers to Cuzco, to
complete the amount out of the royal treasury; and it is said that
eleven thousand llamas, each bearing a hundredweight of gold, really
started thence for Caxamarca. But before they arrived, Atahuallpa was
hung. The terrible news ran like a lighted train through the whole
country, and reached the Indians who were driving the heavily laden
llamas over the uplands of Central Peru. Panic-stricken, they buried
their treasures upon the very spot where the mournful message was
delivered to them, and dispersed in all directions.” Eleven thousand
hundredweight of gold! If this were true, the cruelty of the Spaniards
to their prisoner brought its own punishment. The buried treasure,
whatever its amount, has never been recovered, although numerous
researches have been made. Either the secret has perished with its
possessors, or those Peruvians to whom it has been handed down, persist,
with the sullen and impenetrable reserve that forms a distinguishing
trait in their character, in preventing their white oppressors from
reaping the benefit of it.

With the death of Atahuallpa, the principal danger incurred by the
Spaniards in Peru--that, namely, of a combined and simultaneous uprising
of the nation--may be said to have terminated. Subsequently, it is true,
under the Inca Manco, a terrible insurrection occurred: an Indian army,
the boldest, best equipped, and in all respects the most formidable that
the Spaniards had seen, boldly assailed them, burned Cuzco, and
beleaguered them in the citadel. At one time Pizarro felt the greatest
uneasiness as to the possible result of this last effort for Peruvian
independence. Seven hundred Christians fell in the course of the
struggle. But there were still sufficient left to reduce the insurgents,
and inflict a terrible chastisement. Lima had been built, and fortified
posts established. And serious as this uprising was, there hardly seems
to have been a probability of the extermination of the Spaniards in
Peru, or of their expulsion from the country, at any period subsequent
to Atahuallpa’s execution. The throne vacant, the rights of succession
uncertain, the ancient institutions of the country fell to pieces, and
anarchy ensued. Peruvian generals gathered their armies around them,
seized upon provinces, declared themselves independent, and were beaten
in detail. Difficulties and hardships were still in store for the
conquerors; privations, and painful marches, and sharp encounters; but
they were strengthened by reinforcements, cheered by success, and urged
on by their thirst of gold, which was irritated rather than assuaged by
the rich booty they had made. After crowning with his own hands a
brother of Atahuallpa, selected in preference to Manco, the legitimate
heir to the throne, as more likely to be a docile instrument in his
hands, Pizarro marched upon Cuzco, the much-talked-of metropolis of
Peru, with a force that now amounted to nearly five hundred men,
one-third of them cavalry. After a sharp skirmish or two, in which the
Peruvians displayed much spirit and bravery, the conquerors entered the
capital. They were disappointed in the amount of booty found there.
Their expectations must have been outrageous, for the spoil was very
large. The great temple was studded with gold plates; its gardens
glittered with ornaments of the same precious metal. In a cavern near
the city they found a number of pure gold vases, and ten or twelve
statues of women, as large as life, some of gold, others of silver. The
stores of food, and of manufactures for clothing and ornament, were very
numerous and considerable. And there were women’s dresses composed
entirely of gold beads; and “in one place they met with ten planks or
bars of solid silver, each piece being twenty feet in length, one foot
in breadth, and two or three inches thick.” But the rapacious Europeans
were not content, and some of the inhabitants were barbarously tortured
to compel them to reveal their hidden stores of wealth. Gold lost its
value, and the commonest necessaries of life rose to exorbitant prices.
A quire of paper was worth ten golden dollars, a bottle of wine fetched
sixty. And the inherent Spanish vice of gambling was carried to a
prodigious extent. Many of the conquerors thus lost the whole of their
booty. One man had received in his share of spoil a golden image of the
sun. “This rich prize the spendthrift lost in a single night; whence it
came to be a proverb in Spain, _Juega el Sol antes que amanezca_, ‘Play
away the sun before sunrise.’”

With the capture of Cuzco, or very soon afterwards, the unity of Spanish
conquest in Peru may be said to have ceased. Previously to that event,
all were subordinate to Pizarro; none claimed independence of him; he
kept his men together, and with his whole force--excepting the small
garrison at St Miguel--pushed forward into the heart of the land. It was
by far the most romantic and adventurous period of Spanish operations in
the empire of the Incas. But now other cavaliers of fortune, good
soldiers, and men of experience in American warfare, turned their
attention to Peru, eager to share its treasures and territory. Amongst
these, the governor of Guatimala, Pedro de Alvarado, one of Cortés’
officers, was conspicuous. Early in 1534, he landed in the Bay of
Caraques, at the head of five hundred men, “the best equipped and most
formidable array that had yet appeared in the southern seas.” They
marched towards the rich province of Quito, which they believed to be
still unexplored; but suffered frightfully on the road; and on emerging,
with greatly diminished numbers, from the Puertos Nevados, a terrible
mountain passage where many of the troopers were frozen in their
saddles, they had the mortification to discover the hoof prints of
Spanish chargers, proving that they had been forestalled. Benalcazar,
governor of San Miguel, had entered the province with one hundred and
forty men and some native auxiliaries. He had been met by the Indian
general Ruminavi; but the son of the Moor was more than a match for the
Peruvian, and after some well-contested fights, the standard of Castile
waved over Quito’s capital. Almagro, who had heard of Alvarado’s
landing, soon joined Benalcazar, and together they marched to oppose
their intruding countrymen. At one time a battle seemed imminent, but
matters were finally compromised, Alvarado receiving one hundred
thousand _pesos de oro_, and re-embarking his men.

Amongst the conquerors themselves, dissensions soon broke out. Charles
the Fifth, to whom Hernando Pizarro had been sent to give an account of
events in Peru, and to submit specimens of its riches and manufactures,
had received the envoy most favourably. He confirmed his previous
grants of land to Francisco Pizarro, extending them seventy leagues
further south, and empowered Almagro to discover and occupy the country
for two hundred leagues south of that. Disputes about boundaries,
imbittered by the rankling recollection of former feuds, soon occurred
between Pizarro and Almagro; and though a temporary reconciliation was
effected, a civil war at last broke out, where both parties fought
nominally for the honour and profit of the Spanish king, and in reality
for their own peculiar behoof and ambition. “_El Rey y Almagro!_” “_El
Rey y Pizarro!_” were the battle-cries on the bloody field of Las
Salinas, in the neighbourhood of Cuzco, where, on the 26th April 1538,
Almagro fell into the hands of Hernando Pizarro, who, from their very
first meeting, had bitterly disliked him. “Before the battle of Salinas,
it had been told to Hernando Pizarro that Almagro was like to die.
‘Heaven forbid,’ he exclaimed, ‘that this should come to pass before he
falls into my hands!’” After such a speech, Almagro’s fate scarce
admitted of a doubt. He was brought to trial, on charges that covered
two thousand folio pages. Found guilty, he was condemned to death, and
perished by the _garrote_. He was to have been executed on the public
square of Cuzco; but public sympathy was so strongly enlisted on his
side, that it was thought more prudent to make an end of him in his
dungeon. The chief apparent movers of his death, Hernando and Gonzalo
Pizarro, were amongst the principal mourners at his funeral--thus aping
the hypocrisy of their brother Francisco, who had paid similar honours
to his victim Atahuallpa. The Marquis himself was on his way to Cuzco
during Almagro’s trial, of which he was cognizant. He lingered on the
road, and upon reaching the river Abancay he learned his rival’s death.
The old farce was played over again. He shed tears, for whose sincerity
none gave him credit. Speedily forgetting this mockery of wo, he entered
Cuzco in triumph, richly dressed, and with clang of martial music. There
can be little doubt of his having secretly instigated and entirely
approved the execution of Almagro. The testimony of all the impartial
historians of the time concurs in fixing its odium upon him.

But the crimes of this great conqueror and bad man were destined to meet
punishment. By the sword he had risen--by the sword he was to perish;
not on some well-fought battle field, with shouts of victory ringing in
his ear, but in his palace hall, by the assassin’s blade. In his own
fair capital of Lima, the City of the Kings, the gem of the Pacific,
which had sprung up under his auspices with incredible rapidity--for
Pizarro seemed to impart his vast energy to all about him--a score of
conspirators, assembled at the house of Almagro’s son, plotted his
death. It was on a Sunday in June 1541, at the hour of dinner, that they
burst into his apartments, with cries of “Death to the tyrant!” A number
of visitors were with him, but they were imperfectly armed, and deserted
him, escaping by the windows. His half-brother, Martinez de Alcantara,
two pages and as many cavaliers, were all who stood forward in defence
of their chief. They soon fell, overpowered by numbers, and covered with
wounds. But Pizarro was not the man meekly to meet his death. Alone,
without armour, his cloak around one arm, his good sword in his right
hand, the old hero kept his cowardly assailants at bay, with a vigour
and intrepidity surprising at his advanced age. “What ho!” he cried,
“traitors! have you come to kill me in my own house?” And as he spoke,
two of his enemies fell beneath his blows. “Rada, (the chief of the
conspirators) impatient of the delay, called out ‘Why are we so long
about it? Down with the tyrant!’ and taking one of his companions,
Narvaez, in his arms, he thrust him against the Marquis. Pizarro,
instantly grappling with his opponent, ran him through with his sword.
But at that moment he received a wound in the throat, and reeling, he
sank on the floor, while the swords of Rada and several of the
conspirators were plunged into his body. ‘Jesu!’ exclaimed the dying
man; and, tracing a cross with his finger on the bloody floor, he bent
down his head to kiss it, when a stroke, more friendly than the rest,
put an end to his existence.”

Great indeed have been the changes wrought by three centuries in the
world beyond the Atlantic. The difference in the manner of foundation of
the English and Spanish empires in America is not more striking than the
contrast offered by their progress and present condition. The English,
Dutch, and other northern nations, were content to obtain a footing in
the new-found lands, without attempting their conquest. Settled upon the
coast, defending themselves, often with extreme difficulty, against the
assaults of warlike and crafty tribes, they aimed not at the subjugation
of empires, or, if visions of future dominion occasionally crossed the
imagination of the more far-sighted, the means proposed were not those
of armed aggression and sanguinary spoliation, but the comparatively
slow and bloodless victories of civilisation. Far otherwise was it with
the warlike and ambitious Spaniard of the sixteenth century, when, with
a mixture of crusading zeal and freebooting greed, he shaped his
caravel’s course for distant _El-Dorado_. Not with a log-house, in the
wilderness was _he_ content; it suited not his lofty and chivalrous
notions to clear land and plough it, and water the stubborn furrow with
his forehead’s sweat. For him the bright cuirass, the charging steed,
the wild encounter with tawny hosts, reminding him of the day when,
after eight hundred years’ struggle, he chased the last Saracen from
Iberia’s shores. For him the glittering gold mine, the rich plantation,
the cringing throng of Indian serfs. One day a cavalier of fortune, with
horse and arms for sole possessions, the next he sat upon the throne
whence he had hurled some far-descended prince, some Inca demi-god, or
feather-crowned cacique. And at the period that a few scanty bands of
expatriated malefactors, and of refugees for opinion’s sake, flying from
persecution to the wilderness, toiled out a scanty and laborious
existence in the forests and prairies of North America, and alone
represented the Anglo-Saxon race in the New World, Spain was in secure
and undisturbed enjoyment of two vast and productive empires. To-day,
how great the contrast! The unwieldy Spanish colonies have crumbled and
fallen to pieces, the petty English settlements have grown into a
flourishing and powerful nation. And we behold the descendants of the
handful of exiles who first colonised “the wild New England shore,”
penetrating, almost unopposed, to the heart of the country that
Montezuma ruled, and Cortés was the first to conquer.




CROSSING THE DESERT.


Several years ago, just before the Palmerstonian policy had involved all
Asia, from Scinde to Syria, in war and anarchy, a young Englishman of
family and fortune, named Sidney, remained at Cairo in spring after all
his countrymen had departed for Alexandria in order to avoid the
Khamseen winds. The month of April was well advanced in all its heat;
and it disputes with May the opprobrium of being the most detestable
month of the year from Rosetta to Dongola. The society of Misr the
Kaherah (victorious) offered no resources beyond the shabby
coffee-houses and the apparitions of Indian travellers. But at that time
only a few Griffins and Nabobs were occasionally seen. There was nothing
to resemble the hordes which now pass through Cairo in their bi-monthly
emigrations, like flights of locusts devouring every thing that comes in
their way, from the bread on the _table-d’hôte_ at the _Hotel d’Orient_
to the oranges and melons piled up like ammunition at the sides of the
streets. Now, indeed, it may truly be said of these locusts, as it was
of the plague of old. “Very grievous are they. Before them there were no
such locusts as they; neither after them shall be such.”

Mr Sidney, in order to escape from the habitual desolation of the
Esbekieh, and avoid witnessing the fearful voracity of his countrymen,
passed a good deal of his time in a coffee-house in the Mouski. His
apology to himself for this idle and unprofitable life was his wish to
improve his knowledge of colloquial Arabic. His studies in Arabic
literature had been pursued with some industry and profit during the
winter, under the guidance of Sheikh Ismael el Feel or the Elephant, so
called from his rotundity of carcass and protuberance of proboscis. The
love of French brandy displayed by this learned Theban had induced the
European consuls to regard him as an oracle of Mohammedan law, and a
striking proof of the progress of civilisation in the East. The Elephant
repaid their esteem by unbounded affection for their purses and an
immeasurable contempt for their persons. Sidney, however, had lost the
friendship of the literary Elephant; for the learned Sheik, supposing
that he was about to quit Cairo with the rest of his countrymen, had
thought fit to absent himself, taking away as a keepsake a splendid new
oriental dress just sent home from the tailor.

One day as Sidney was musing on the feasibility of crossing the desert
at this unfavourable season, in order to spend his Easter at Jerusalem,
two strangers entered the coffee-house in which he was seated. As no
Indian mail was expected, he could not help examining them with some
attention. One was a little man, not of a very prepossessing appearance,
with a pale face and a squeaking voice; the other was a stout Scotsman,
at least six feet two inches in height of body, and who, before he had
swallowed a cup of coffee and smoked a single sheesheh, indicated that
he was of a corresponding height of mind, by reminding his companion
that he was a literary man. The strangers, after throwing a scrutinising
glance at the inmates of the room, continued their conversation in
English. The pale-faced man spoke as a foreigner, though almost as
correctly as a native, and with a fluency perfectly marvellous. The tall
Scotsman seemed not quite satisfied with the degree of familiarity he
assumed even in a Caireen coffee-house.

“Well, Mr Lascelles Hamilton, it is very true I am going to Jerusalem,
and so is Mr Ringlady; but I thought you said you intended to go to
Mecca, when you joined us at Alexandria in hiring a boat to Cairo.”

“My dear Campbell,” (here Mr Campbell gave a wince, which showed that he
was very ungrateful for the endearment,) “I can’t go to Mecca for three
months yet; my Arabic won’t have the pure accent of the Hedjas in a
shorter space of time. I mean, therefore, to go round by Jerusalem, join
the tribes beyond the Dead Sea, and work my way by land.”

This was enough for Sidney. He determined to join the party; and was
moving out of the coffee-house to take his measures for that purpose,
when Aali Bey--a young Osmanlee dandy, who had passed a few months at
Leghorn to study European diplomacy--made him a sign that he wished to
speak in private. Aali’s story had so long a preface, and was so crammed
with flattery and oriental compliments, that Sidney became soon
satisfied it would terminate in an attempt to borrow money, if not in
robbery and murder. He was nevertheless mistaken; for Aali, after many
vain endeavours to shorten his preface, at last stated his real
business. It proved deserving of a long-winded introduction, and
amounted to a proposition to Sidney to assist in affording Aali an
opportunity of carrying off his bride, the daughter of the celebrated
Sheikh Salem Abou Rasheed, from Cairo to Syria. Sheikh Salem was a man
of great influence at Nablous; and he had been detained by Mohammed Ali
as a kind of hostage with all his family, as he was returning from the
pilgrimage to Mecca by the easy route of Cosseir and the Nile.

The affair seemed too serious even for the thoughtless Sidney to engage
in without some consideration; and he attempted to persuade Aali that
his escape was impossible, and that he had better live contentedly with
his bride at Cairo, more particularly as it was a very bad season for a
lady to think of crossing the desert. Aali, however, informed him, that
he was not married, nor indeed likely to be, unless the marriage took
place at Gaza; for Sheikh Salem had offered him his daughter Fatmeh, on
the condition of escorting her and her mother to Gaza, where the
marriage would take place in presence of the Sheikh of Hebron, and other
relations of the family. Aali conjured Sidney by every saint, Mussulman
and Christian, to aid him in his enterprise, which would raise him to
the rank of a chief in Syria. As it appeared that Sheikh Salem had
really put some supply of cash at the disposal of the young spendthrift,
and Sidney knew well with what difficulty an Oriental parts with the
smallest conceivable fraction of coin even to men more prudent than
Aali, he now deemed it necessary to let the young Osmanlee know what he
had just heard concerning the movements of an English party. It was
arranged that Sidney should learn all he could about the new travellers,
and inform Aali in an evening walk in the Esbekieh.

Sidney, on finding the travellers resided at the _Hotel d’Orient_,
joined the _table-d’hôte_ that day. The party consisted of four persons:
Sidney; the pale-faced, squeaking-voiced Mr Lascelles Hamilton; the tall
Caledonian, Mr Campbell; and a gentleman with a mellifluous voice, and
an air which said, Look at me and listen. This gentleman was Mr
Ringlady--the celebrated Mr Ringlady, a middle-aged lawyer, innocent of
briefs, who had written some works on jurisprudence.

For a short time the Britons of the party looked at Sidney’s Egyptian
dress with the supercilious disdain which enables Americans to recognise
the inhabitants of the old country, while they are engaged in
advertising their own nationality in earnest endeavours to keep their
bodies in equilibrium on a single leg of their chairs. The voluble Mr
Lascelles Hamilton, however, soon placed every body on a familiar
footing. He lost no time in ascertaining Sidney’s name and country from
the waiter, and then launched forth.

“I hear, Mr Sidney, you have been five months at Cairo; I am sure you
have found it a delightful place. For my part, I have not been five
hours; but I could-stay five years, for I have seen five wonders.”

“As I have not been so fortunate in my five months’ residence,” said
Sidney, “you must tell me the wonders you have seen, before I give you
my opinion of its delights.”

“First, then, the donkey on which I made my entry into the city of
Saladin, ran away with me. No horse could ever do that, so think I
entered Cairo riding on Old Nick! Second, I did knock down two ladies,
each one as large as three donkeys and myself, and they did not scream.
Third, my donkey did pitch me into the middle of the street, and nobody
did laugh. Fourth, I did see Ibrahim Pasha pay his whole household in
loaves of sugar--a year’s wages, all in loaves of sugar. And fifth, I do
see four Englishmen sit down to a good dinner in Cairo in the month of
April, without one of them being on his way to India.”

Mr Ringlady, who had been watching impatiently during this long speech
for an opportunity of displaying the mellifluous voice of which he was
so proud, in contrast to the harsh squeak and discordant accent of Mr
Lascelles Hamilton, now gave a specimen of his professional turn of mind
by remarking in his silvery tone, that he believed the fifth wonder was
not quite a perfect miracle, for one of the party was a native of
Scotland; and then added, glancing his eye obliquely from Mr Lascelles
Hamilton to Sidney, “and perhaps all of us may not have been born in
Great Britain.”
In short, the present system under which the whole of us are groaning,
and which, if not speedily abandoned, must land us in irretrievable
difficulties, is neither more nor less than a most culpable interference
with credit, by restricting the ordinary circulation of the country to a
point far below that which is absolutely necessary for its exigencies,
and by making any further issue of paper dependent upon the purchase and
the hoarding of gold.

It may sound paradoxical when we say that we are almost glad when a
crisis like the present has arisen, because we are convinced that
nothing short of actual and painful experience will open the eyes of the
community to the miserable fallacies upon which the views of their
former and their present rulers are founded. Of all questions which can
be agitated we are quite aware that that of the currency is the least
palatable to the general reader, and the one which he most gladly
escapes from in a kind of mazed bewilderment, and generally with a
confession that its intricacies are beyond his comprehension. It is now
full time that this state of general apathy should be ended. If we hope
to preserve much longer our course of national prosperity, we must face
the question manfully, and not shrink even from the array of figures
which quacks in currency invariably adduce for the purpose of mystifying
their audience; just as their medical brethren contrive to render
themselves unintelligible by the use of a peculiar jargon. There is,
after all, no great mystery in the matter, if men would take the trouble
of reflecting for themselves. The laws which ought to regulate the
currency of a country should have reference to the real property of that
country as its basis, and not an artificial substitute like gold, which,
in addition to its scarcity and its liability to fluctuation, is
incomparably the dearest circulating medium which has ever yet been
adopted. In the words of the authors of the Gemini Letters--a
publication, by the way, which is well worthy the attention of every man
who seeks to make himself master of the details of the currency
question--“we must not expect to be relieved from the distress, and
difficulties, and dangers which overshadow the land, so long as we are
determined that the value of the produce of our lands, mines, and
manufactures, and the amount of the wages of labour, shall be dependant
upon the possession of a few millions more or less of gold coin. Will
some stickler for a high metallic standard tell us what proportion the
value of the whole of the gold generally to be had in the United Kingdom
at one time, bears to the value of all the other property of the
country? If this question were satisfactorily answered, it is probable
that we should not much longer be

“Resolved,
Like sugar-loaf turn’d upside down,
To stand upon the smaller end,”

but rather be disposed to treat this particular metal in the way that we
treat all other marketable commodities--namely, suffer it to find its
proper level.”

It is edifying to remark the different interpretations which are given,
by different supporters of the bullion representative system, of the
present acknowledged distress and unparalleled tightness in the money
markets of Great Britain. Sir Robert Peel--the apostle of the system,
upon whose shoulders, we maintain, the primary burden of this enormous
responsibility must rest--cannot but admit the fact of the gloomy
deficiency; but he falls back upon the ultimate causes. These are,
according to his view, over-speculation in railways, joined with a
scarcity of food and an increase in the price of cotton. Granting all
this to be true, what has that to do with the great question at issue?
We are perfectly ready to admit that at the present moment there is an
immense demand for money, and that the demand may be owing, in a great
measure, to these and similar causes. We know perfectly well that if
there exists a drain upon this country for gold, in order to purchase
from abroad the supply of food which is deficient in consequence of the
scarcity at home, the currency must necessarily be contracted, so long
as a five-pound note of the Bank of England, or of any other bank, is
held to be, in the eye of the law, not the representative of so much
real property--be it land, or stock, or iron--but the eidolon or shadow
of five golden coins of a certain weight and fineness, which cannot
escape from the empire without annihilating the existence of the
subsidiary paper. What we complain of in effect is this, that the whole
enormous property of the three kingdoms should be represented merely by
the insignificant and insufficient issue of thirty-two millions in
bank-notes, and that the whole remainder of the currency is entirely
metallic. For although there may certainly at times be a larger amount
of paper in circulation, that paper, beyond the thirty-two millions,
must be represented by bullion in the bank, and if the latter be
withdrawn, the representative issue must be recalled. So that, by a
large drain of gold, we may be reduced, and are at this moment becoming
so, to so contracted a circulation, that trade must necessarily stand
still for the sheer want of a common representative of property.

Why, and on what principles, the amount of our paper circulation was
fixed at so low a point, we are utterly unable to conceive, unless it
was for the purpose of compelling a large portion of our trading
capital to remain fruitless and withdrawn from use in the form of
unprofitable gold. Thirty-two millions, even in ordinary times, is not
above one-half of what is required for the needful circulation of the
country. In 1810 the currency of the paper for the three kingdoms was
not less than sixty millions; and during the thirty-seven years which
have elapsed since that time, not only has our population increased at
an enormous ratio, but our trade and enterprise augmented in a more than
corresponding degree. The tendency, however, of our improved system of
banking has been to reduce the circulation within the lowest possible
limit; but that limit was necessarily variable, and adjusted itself to
meet the occurring contingencies of the country. Now it is fixed by the
legislature at a point so low, that we are absolutely dependent upon the
amount of gold which we can retain in the country, for the means of
commercial interchange. We are obliged at present, it seems, to
transport a large portion of our gold to America for the purchase of
food. For every sovereign which leaves our shores a note is taken out of
circulation, and no means whatever are permitted to individuals or to
banking companies to supply the deficiency. In ordinary times, it might
be expected that the gold would again find its way to Britain; at
present, however, it is absorbed and scattered for the purpose of
enabling America to prosecute her aggressive war against Mexico. And of
what use, we ask, to the nation at large, are some ten or twelve
millions converted into specie and stored up in the vaults beneath the
Bank of England? Sir Robert Peel tells us, with a smile of peculiar
complacency, that the hoarding up of so much bullion is a safeguard
against a panic, because it renders any run upon the banks for gold a
matter of absolute impossibility. With only thirty-two millions of paper
extant for the common circulation of the nation, we shrewdly suspect
that any apprehensions of a run upon the banks are as visionary as the
dreams of El Dorado. No one knows better than Sir Robert Peel that the
paper currency of a country must be sorely depreciated indeed before any
such event can take place; and surely there are many means of preventing
an over-issue, without bringing us to such a pass that in every season
of scarcity or of war we must be reduced to an absolute halt--which, in
a commercial country like ours, is a word equivalent to the
impoverishment and the ruin of thousands.

We presume that Sir Robert Peel, when he carried through the Banking
Restriction Act, intended that measure to be a permanent one. We cannot
suppose that he meant it merely to apply to the present situation and
necessities of the country, or that it was left to be repealed and
altered every session of parliament, to suit the state of the money
market, and the fluctuations of the national prosperity. If so, we think
it must at once become apparent to every reasonable man, that a gross
and palpable absurdity was involved in the very principle of the
measure. For to limit the supply of the ordinary circulation in a
commercial country like ours, liable as it is to expansion and
contraction, to periods of peculiar activity and of occasional serious
depression, is quite as preposterous an idea as it would be to declare
by statute what amount of food or what extent of water should in all
time coming be used by the inhabitants of the British Islands. To
interfere with the operation of credit, which is the object of Sir
Robert Peel, is practically the greatest blow that can be given to the
enterprise and the advancement of the country; for it just amounts to
this, that not having a sufficiency of straw wherewith to manufacture
our bricks, we are even denied the privilege of going out into the
fields to collect the subsidiary stubble. The Pharaoh of Tamworth is a
heavier taskmaster than the Egyptian. He demands our daily rate of
taxes, but will neither furnish us with the material, nor permit us to
gather it for ourselves.

If permanent, it is incumbent upon the supporters of the Banking
Restriction Act, who are the very parties at present refusing to relax
one iota of our bondage, to show that their measure is well adapted for
every political contingency. That, we apprehend, would require greater
hardihood, and certainly more ingenuity, than they have yet enlisted on
their side. There are many things besides a scarcity or a famine which
may occasion a drain of gold. That metal has a peculiar facility of
finding its own level; it is liable to sudden demands, and its price is
variable accordingly. Were this country to be again engaged in a
European contest like the last, we should have a recurrence of the drain
of 1814, when gold was at the rate of £5, 8s. per ounce, or upwards of
one pound ten shillings and two-pence above its present value. No
political foresight, no legislative enactment whatever, can guard us
against such a state of things; and the consequence would be an entire
disappearance of bullion. According to our present system, the loss of
bullion would necessarily produce such a contraction as would lay the
credit of the country prostrate. All our extra circulation, founded on
the metallic basis, would immediately be called in; taxes could no
longer be paid, and the result would be a revolution or the sponge. Are
the capitalists of the kingdom, who, we were told some time ago, were
the chief supporters of Sir Robert Peel, anxious that the experiment
should be made? We can assure them that if it is intended to maintain
the circulation of the country permanently upon its present basis, they
stand in imminent danger, not only of occasional panics, but of that
repudiation which in America was the consequence of a similar tampering
with the banks, and the like metallic delusion. At best they must make
up their minds for the recurrence of many seasons as hard and as cruel
as the present; and it will be well if many of their class are not
involved in the ruin which is impending at this moment over the heads of
the minor traders.

But, say some of the bullionists, this measure is not intended to be
permanent. It is, like all other legislative enactments, subject to
modification; and we are prepared, when occasion presses, to alter it
accordingly. Why, then, in the name of common sense--nay, in that of
common humanity--has not the alteration been made? Is it intended that
the public shall sink beneath the pressure of this law before the
smallest portion of its burden shall be removed? Is it wise to delay all
relief until the Gazette is full, and to keep credit suspended at the
very moment when it is most urgently and clamantly required? And what
kind of law, we ask, is that which in prosperous times--that is,
whenever gold is abundant--confessedly puts no check whatever upon
speculation, but which, at the least turn of the tide, is an absolute
engine of destruction? Look at it in any view, and we maintain that a
more miserable instance of legislation upon false and contracted
principles was never yet invented by the brain of a political economist.

The host of pamphlets which has recently issued from the press, upon
this momentous and interesting topic, sufficiently demonstrates the
pressing nature of the crisis. Whatever difference of opinion may be
found amongst so many writers, with regard to the intermediate basis and
proper representative of property, they are almost to a man combined in
denouncing the impolicy of the late restrictions. Lord Ashburton, the
advocate and apologist of the Bank of England, is at one with Mr
Enderby, the able opponent of the gold standard, as to this particular
point. They are all agreed that the system which professes to rectify an
inevitable drain of gold, by crippling the trade of the country, and
forcing down the value of its property, is nothing short of absolute
infatuation, and that, considered by itself, it admits of no
intelligible defence. It would be well, therefore, if an effort were
made, in the first instance, to get rid of the odious and absurd
restrictions, or at least to substitute for the present miserable
driblet, a much larger amount of paper currency, which may be based upon
government securities. There is but one opinion prevalent throughout the
country with regard to the present insufficiency of the currency, so
long at least as the Bank is compelled by statute to deprive us of the
means of fair and legitimate accommodation. Sir Robert Peel has placed
the directors in this anomalous and invidious position, that they _must_
put on the screw whenever there is a prospect of adverse exchanges; and
the immediate effect of that measure is a stoppage of trade, and at the
same time a depression in the value of every kind of merchandise and
product. Taken singly, this is an evil of the very worst description--in
fact nothing worse could be expected from the most formidable
combination of natural and political causes. Taken in connexion with the
late tariffs, which, without securing reciprocity, have opened the home
market to the competition of the foreigner, who is less taxed and
cheaper fed than our own redundant population, each recurrence of it is
a blow to our commercial prosperity, which if often repeated would bring
us to the verge of ruin. The first measure, therefore, which ought to be
taken--and we entreat the serious attention of every man who understands
the currency question to this--is to emancipate the Directors of the
Bank of England from their present false position, by removing the
restriction of their paper issues, or at least by fixing these at a
point which will enable them to supply the ordinary wants of the
community, without reference to an accidental or inevitable drain of
bullion, so that the internal trade and production may never be checked
so long as there is a remunerative demand. A similar regulation must of
course be made with regard to the country bankers; and were this done,
we have very little fear indeed that any crisis at all equal to the
present one could arise. But we must not be left in absolute dependence
for our circulation upon the state of the harvest, or cripple labour at
the very season when employment is most urgently required.

We do not say that the repeal of the Act of 1844, or the increase of the
paper issues to a larger fixed point, can set the question of the
currency at rest. No thinking man who has devoted his time and energies
to the study of our monetary history, would be bold enough to make so
rash and confident an assertion: on the contrary, we think that the time
is not far distant, when the leading theories of the bullionists must be
thoroughly probed, and the consideration of the expediency of a fixed
gold standard most seriously and deliberately resumed. The experience of
some thirty years of peace has furnished data to us which were not known
to the older political economists, and we are now far better enabled to
explain the phenomena of commercial fluctuation. But it would be
extremely unwise at the present moment, when a palpable and tangible
evil is before us, to attempt too wide a reformation, and so to peril
the chance of a present amendment, on the necessity of which we are all
most thoroughly agreed.

From some quarters we have heard an expression of extreme surprise that
the late Premier, who cannot but be awake to the mischief which he has
so wantonly caused, should have been so obstinate and inflexible in his
adherence to the restrictive system. Very little consideration indeed is
requisite to discover the reason. Upon this question of the currency the
whole character and repute of Sir Robert Peel as a financial minister
are staked, and he dare not abandon his measure of 1844, without tacitly
admitting that he has committed a most serious and unpardonable blunder.
Accident has intervened to postpone any actual test of the efficiency of
his other measures. We do not yet know what effect the alteration of the
corn laws may produce upon the welfare of the nation in an ordinary
year, or whether any of the blessings so abundantly promised may be
realized to the poor without a more than corresponding depression. The
tariffs abroad continue still hostile and unrelaxed, and although the
smaller manufacturer, artisan, and workman, are already beginning to
feel the baneful effects of foreign competition in the home market,
their cry is not yet loud enough to excite a large share of the popular
commiseration. Two great events stand prominently forward in the aspect
of the present year--the scarcity and high price of food, and the want
of commercial accommodation among ourselves.

The first is the act of Providence. No human foresight, no political
skill, could have prevented it, and the scourge has mercifully fallen at
a time when the demand for labour has materially lessened its severity
in Great Britain. But that same scarcity, by leading to an exportation
of the precious metal, has been undoubtedly the means of testing the
soundness of our monetary system. As the prosperity of these islands,
and our wonderful ascendency in the great markets of the world, depend
upon the state of our trade and our manufactures at home, it was
obviously the duty of a minister, who, more than any other, professed
his intimacy with commercial principles, to take care that the evil of a
scarcity should not at the same time be combined with the still greater
one of a monetary crisis. If gold must be paid away in order to purchase
the necessary supply of food for our population--if in addition to our
own wants we are compelled to ward off starvation from the thoughtless
and unenterprising Irish--we were doubly bound to take care that our
great staple resources, our trade and our manufactures, should not
suffer from any cause over which we had the evident control. And yet,
how do we stand at the present moment? No sooner does the drain of
bullion begin, than the Directors of the Bank of England, placed by this
odious and uncalled-for measure of Peel’s in sudden jeopardy of their
charter, begin to put on the screw. The country bankers, who must take
their cue from, because they are rendered entirely subordinate to the
great establishment in London, are compelled to follow the example.
First of all the rates of discount are raised, and then credit is
peremptorily refused. This, be it remarked, is at a time when the
solvency of individuals is unsuspected,--were it otherwise, the crash
must have been tremendous ere now. The enormous bulk of the _real_
circulation of the country, which is represented by bills of exchange,
and which never can be estimated with any thing like an approximation to
its amount, is thus instantaneously checked. The Banks cannot
discount--the bills become useless, and the property on which they are
based, can not now command its representative. Fifty thousand pounds of
silver bullion could not command five thousand pounds of money in the
public market of London. The manufacturer saw his credit stopped, his
bills unnegociable, but he had still to pay the weekly rate of wages, or
suspend labour, as indeed in many instances has been done. And all this,
because Sir Robert Peel has forced the fountain of our currency to run
dry. And then comes a depreciation of the value of property, the extent
of which would be almost incredible, were not every one of us, except
the Capitalist and the Annuitant, aware of it by melancholy experience.
According to Lord Ashburton--“It would not be easy to estimate this
depreciation, extending over all merchandise, stocks, railway shares,
&c.; it would probably not be overstated at FROM TEN TO TWENTY PER
CENT.; but what is worse, it has paralysed this property in the hands of
the possessors, rendered it unavailable towards meeting their
engagements, and thus produced in many cases pecuniary sacrifices much
beyond the mere depreciation of the property itself. It has further
occasioned the suspension of the execution of orders from our customers
in every quarter, thus distressing manufacturers, and impeding those
very operations which would have corrected the tendency to an
unfavourable balance of trade, and given safety to the circulation of
the Bank.”

Now whatever we may think of the extreme candour of the Right Honourable
Baronet, it is perhaps rather too much to expect from human nature that
an individual who has been the cause of all this monstrous mischief,
should stand forward at once, and manfully plead guilty to the charge.
Sir Robert Peel has not yet played out his full hand of political cards;
and he is perfectly well aware that after such an admission, very few
persons indeed would be inclined to cut in with him for a partner. In
short, were he now to acknowledge himself in the wrong, it would be at
the sacrifice of his sole remaining qualification as a statesman--the
_prestige_ of his financial sagacity. If he loses this, faint though the
recommendation be compared with the far higher qualities of consistency
and open dealing, he is indeed a bankrupt in his fame! Need we wonder
then that he clings to his darling measure, with a tenacity absolutely
startling when we reflect on his former degrading versatility? Need we
wonder that he eagerly attempts to fasten the blame of the monetary
pressure upon the railroad speculators, the Bank Directors, or any other
body of men who can at all be brought into question? As to the Bank
Directors, we quite agree with Lord Ashburton that it is most unfair to
make them the scape-goats in this matter. Had they not been bound down
by stringent statutory fetters--had they been allowed to use the common
caution of every commercial dealer by measuring the amount of their
accommodation by the known responsibility of their customers, there
would have been no financial crisis. But Sir Robert, in his infinite
wisdom, would not suffer them to retain the prerogative of thinking and
rational beings. He made them mere machines for contracting the
circulation, and prohibited them from supporting credit: and surely they
are not blameable if they shaped their conduct according to the clear
letter and distinct direction of the law. In dealing with the railway
shareholders Sir Robert Peel cuts even a sorrier figure. He talks about
absorption of capital and over-trading, as if these things had in
reality any thing to do with an arbitrary restriction of the currency.
Now we do not require to be told that there is a certain limit at which
accommodation must stop; but we maintain that it is the function of the
banker to decide when that limit has arrived in the case of each
particular customer. If a man has embarked the whole of his available
capital in undertakings which are not yet profitable, or which do not
speedily promise to become so, it is unquestionably in the option of the
banker at his own risk to refuse or to increase his credit. But, as
matters presently stand, not only has the banker no such option, but he
cannot afford the required accommodation even to parties whose capital
and property are undoubted, for the very simple reason that the law, as
amended by Peel, deprives him of the means of doing so. If gold goes out
of the country, from whatever cause, the issues must be correspondingly
contracted. And is it expected that the whole ordinary business of the
country can be conducted with something like one half of its usual
amount of circulation? It will not, we presume, be denied by Sir Robert
Peel and his Whig financial adherents that the increase of internal
railway enterprise, and the vast additional labour which it may be said
to have created, require a larger amount of ordinary circulation than in
the year when the Bank Restriction Act was passed. And yet, not only
have no means been taken to provide for such an expansion, but when the
scarcity and drain arise, and the issues are arbitrarily contracted, our
candid economists, instead of acknowledging their own normal error, have
the coolness to attribute the pressure to the employment of labour at
home! Had it not been for that labour and the expenditure of capital
among ourselves, the situation of the working classes during the past
winter, when the prices of provisions were so high, would have been
lamentable indeed.

However, since the currency debate in the House of Commons, Sir Robert
Peel seems to have changed his ground a little. It is curious to remark
that, in all these financial discussions, the members of the present
administration appear as absolute ciphers. They hardly profess to
understand the question, but give their absolute faith to the doctrines
of Sir Robert, who, with some two or three of his remaining adherents,
is put forward to do battle, with the Protectionists and the mercantile
party. The member for Tamworth is now desirous of falling back upon his
old bullionist theories; and, with the utmost gravity, has invited a
serious discussion upon the following subject of debate, “What is a
pound?”

The object of this question is sufficiently clear. The astute
ex-minister, finding himself so vigorously assailed on all quarters, for
the absolute failure of his model banking act, and being unable to
defend it upon any intelligible principles, would fain rake up a point
upon which the opinions of his opponents differ, and so escape from the
dilemma under a cloud of contradictory theories. It is an old device,
and not a very creditable one; but we trust that, on the present
occasion, it may prove utterly unavailing. The question is not now of
the convertibility or inconvertibility of paper; for, if it were
absolutely this, there are materials enough in Sir Robert Peel’s own
banking measures to refute the notions which he professes to maintain as
a principle. His own currency is not altogether based upon gold.
_Fourteen millions of the Bank of England’s paper is unrepresented by
the precious metals_; and yet every one of these notes is an actual
engagement to pay the bearer of it in gold! Notwithstanding all the
arguments of the bullionists, the plain matter of fact is just this,
that the Bank of England, like every other institution of the country,
is substantially based upon credit, _and that it never had, at any one
time, the means of liquidating its engagements by payments in specie_.
The issue, therefore, of paper, as it cannot be made to depend entirely
upon the amount of hoarded gold, ought to have reference simply to the
absolute wants of the community--wants which are, as all experience has
shown, remarkably but inevitably variable, and which must be supplied in
order that trade, and manufactures, and agriculture may go on, and that
our internal products may adapt themselves, with out any difficulty, to
the demand.

The question as to the real nature of a pound is useless at the present
time. We are not now discussing the older banking acts, but the wretched
abortion of 1844, which has led to this unnatural crisis. It is, in
fact, a question which ought not to be mixed up with the others, because
if, as Sir Robert Peel maintains, a pound is neither more nor less than
a piece of metal of a certain weight and fineness, to which he, in
opposition to the practice and experience of the whole world beside, has
attempted to give a fixed unvarying price. He should in the first
instance be prepared to defend it as the sole basis for every kind of
representative circulation. In short, if his theory be correct, no
banker should be permitted to issue a note, unless he has within his
coffers a “pound,”--that is, a sovereign, to redeem it. Were the
bullionists consistent, such indeed would be the proper result of their
arguments, and the consequence would be, that at the present moment the
legal circulation of England would have been something under ten
millions. We shall not pause to demonstrate the absurdity of such a
position, because it carries distinctly upon its face its own triumphant
refutation. It follows therefore, and is admitted, that the basis of our
circulation is mixed--part of it, which fluctuates, being the
representative of these precious “pounds,” and the larger portion being
based on credit, or inconvertible government securities.

What is the use then of arguing about a “pound,” when our paper, if
called in, could not by any possibility realise it? We do not in the
slightest degree deprecate the discussion at a future time; on the
contrary, we most earnestly hope that the whole subject may engage the
early attention of the next Parliament, for we are thoroughly convinced
that the more it is sifted, the more clear and palpable will become the
fallacies of our financial empiric. But we frankly avow our anxiety that
he may not be permitted through such a begging of the question, to
escape from his present difficulties. Let him show, if he can, that his
Act of 1844 was the natural and inevitable result of his previous
measures, and then we may be in a situation to condemn the whole of them
together. But if it is not so, but a mere device of his own to show his
admirable mechanical skill, let him defend it on its own merits. That it
has acted banefully on the currency, no man can deny. It is quite clear
that it has led to an enormous depreciation of property; and the very
fact, that, notwithstanding the unprecedented pressure, the general
credit has been maintained, is above all others the strongest proof that
the pressure was utterly uncalled for. The point for immediate
consideration simply resolves itself into this: are we to leave
untouched upon the statute-book, a law which can at any time expose us
to the inevitable hardship of a monetary crisis like the present?--Are
we to continue and approve of an Act, the operation of which is, in
certain circumstances, to drain dry the fountain of our currency, and
that at the very time when an expansion of the currency is required? We
do not want to hear from Sir Robert Peel, any more than from an
itinerant lecturer, his definition of the nature of a “pound.” What we
want is a fair current representative for our property, without an
adequate supply of which, that property becomes stationary and is
depreciated. The depreciation of the last few months has, upon the most
moderate calculation, swallowed up at least two years of the surplus
capital of the country, and yet we are told that such a state of things
is not only necessary but wholesome! We are quite aware that it is in
vain to look for any remedy at the hands of the Whigs. They are at
present in a state of most hopeless bewilderment on the subject;
trusting in the first instance to Sir Robert Peel, and in the next to
the chapter of accidents. A good harvest they think will be sufficient
to remove all immediate difficulty; prices will again revive, and the
monetary distress be forgotten. We pray most earnestly that the first
part of their anticipations may prove correct, but we shall not on that
account relax in our exertions to overturn a system which may at any
moment expose us to the recurrence of a similar calamity.

With very few exceptions the whole of the public press is with us, and
we can hardly believe that the intelligence of the nation is not
adequate to work out its own relief. In fact, out of the House of
Commons there is hardly a single man who does not reprobate the
continual tampering with the currency, which, next to his marvellous
power of tergiversation, is the leading characteristic of Peel: nor
would his measure of 1844 have been carried but for his confident
puffing of the merits of his own machinery, and the almost universal
belief in his talents as a financial minister. The bankers, and all
those--who were familiar with monetary matters, and who, from long
experience, were gifted with foresight and sagacity, not only
entertained but expressed the most serious doubts as to the permanent
working of the act. But all warning was rejected with scorn by our
political dictator, who was resolved to have his own way; and at the
present moment we are reaping the delectable harvest of our confidence.

We have already spoken, quite fully enough, of the manner in which the
unanimous remonstrance of the Scottish bankers was received. The fact
that their representation was backed by the unanimous voice of the
public, beseeching that they might be left alone without any legislative
interference, went for nothing in the eyes of Sir Robert. He had, to say
the truth, too much power, and he never was chary in abusing it. He
dealt with Scotland as if she were an insignificant colony, too ignorant
to regulate her own monetary affairs, and too weak to resist any show of
forcible aggression. In the plenitude of his rashness, however, he
displayed the same disregard to public opinion in regulating the
currency of England; and we shall now proceed to detail a very few of
the several warnings which he has received.

In 1844 the following document was laid before him; and we surely do not
exaggerate its importance when we say, that it proceeded from a body of
men whose opinions, upon monetary subjects, were entitled to be listened
to with the utmost respect and deference:--“We, the undersigned bankers
of London, are induced, by the importance of the measure and our
interest in its success, to address you upon the subject of the Bank
Charter Bill, now before parliament. We were led to believe, when the
measure was first brought forward, and we feel confident it was
generally understood throughout the country, that although it was the
intention of her Majesty’s government that the paper Circulation of the
Bank of England, in their issue department, should be limited to an
amount not exceeding £14,000,000, upon securities, yet, that in the
event of any particular crisis arising, a power was to be reserved by
the bill enabling the Bank of England, with the consent of the first
Lord of the Treasury, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Master of
the Mint, to extend their issue upon securities beyond that amount. It
is with considerable surprise that we find that the bill now before the
House of Commons does not contain any provision for an extension of the
issue beyond £14,000,000, upon securities, excepting under the special
circumstances named in the fifth clause of the bill now before
parliament. We are apprehensive that the absolute limitation of the
issue to £14,000,000, without any power of expansion reserved, whether
that amount be in itself a proper amount or not, will create a general
feeling of uneasiness throughout the country, and, by preventing the
satisfactory reception of the measure, will deprive the scheme of many
of the advantages it possesses, and interfere with its success. We
respectfully submit that the effect of such an absolute limitation _will
be to restrict the business of the country by leading to a general
withdrawal of legitimate accommodation_, unless some power be reserved
by the bill for extending the issue with the sanction of the authorities
above alluded to in cases of emergency, to be made apparent to such
authorities.”

This memorial, to which were adhibited the signatures of every eminent
banking firm in London, was treated by Sir Robert Peel with the most
calm and imperturbable indifference. The warning and the danger so
distinctly described and foretold had no effect in altering the
resolution of the intrepid baronet. He had made up his mind to place the
country permanently in commercial fetters, and no representation of the
consequences would cause him to swerve from his purpose. It would have
been well if at that time he had reflected with a little respect upon
the opinions entertained and expressed by his own venerated father--a
man of that sound sagacity and peculiar clearness of conception which
are incomparably more valuable than talents of an adroit and plausible
description. We wish that those few of his old supporters and adherents
who are in the daily habit of diluting the monetary notions of their
idol, would refer to the views which were enunciated by the elder Peel
in his remarkable letter of 1826, addressed to the members of both
houses of parliament. It is surely not unfair to recall the words of the
father as powerful evidence against the destructive theories of the son.

Sir Robert Peel, senior, writes thus:--"In the enlarged scale of
business carried on by this country, embracing a great variety of
pursuits, a reliance on a metallic circulation alone ever did, and ever
will fail us. Gold, though in itself massy, often disappears in
consequence of war or speculation--nay, the breath of rumour itself is
sufficient to disperse it. Our domestic concerns are interrupted, and
confidence lost, for want of an ample and approved medium of traffic.

"I am no friend to an unrestrained issue of paper money, and saw with
concern, in the absence of a due quantity of specie, bills admitted into
circulation issued by persons of respectability, possessing property,
but evidently unable to meet a sudden and large demand upon them. More
than two years ago, I mentioned to a friend, high in his Majesty’s
councils, my fears of the mischief likely to ensue if the practice were
not discontinued; accompanied with a suggestion to confine future issues
of paper money or tokens to the Bank of England and other competent
bodies of men, _who would give security in land, the public funds,
canals, buildings, or other tangible property_, amounting at least to
one-half of the value of their bills or tokens in circulation. My
proposition was not favoured with any notice; yet, had it been adopted,
I am of opinion that most of the panic and distress now so severely felt
in the nation would have been avoided. If such an improvement in the
banking system could be made available, gold would become less
requisite, and the country be supplied with a stationary medium of
exchange originating with ourselves.

"The present panic and distress in the country have been declared by
high authority to proceed from ‘overtrading’ and ‘wild speculation.’
Infant nations and establishments are liable to miscarry from want of
experience and solidity. TRADING and SPECULATION, being natives of this
island, and parents of our wealth and independence, are surely exempt
from such an imputation. The same authority has declared, that ‘gold and
paper money are incompatible with each other, and cannot exist
together.’ _The population and trade of the empire having been much
increased, a proportionate increase in the medium of circulation is
called for_; and when gold is found insufficient, recourse must be had
to paper, which if improved on the principle already suggested, the two
substances would be found in the same pocket without disunion.

“Anxious to see our situation ameliorated, I trust the currency may be
mended without changing or impairing the national commercial
character--which measure, if resorted to, would resemble the policy of
diverting from its course a powerful river that had long given fertility
and happiness to a large district, merely because, from excessive rains,
it had sometimes exceeded its natural limits, and produced partial
injury.”

A sounder and a clearer view of the sole legitimate control which
government is entitled, for security of the public, to exercise over the
issues of the bankers, cannot be found than this. The elder baronet was
fully alive to the gross absurdity of the bullionists who literally make
toys of their coin. He recognised to its fullest extent the salutary
principle that REAL PROPERTY is, after all, the only proper basis of
circulation: and he would have laughed to scorn the idea of an arbitrary
restricted issue, as the certain means of inflicting a paralytic stroke
upon the energies and the enterprise of the nation. The total neglect of
this view is the capital error of the son. He depreciates the value of
real property, by depriving its possessor of the power to command at any
time its cheap and commodious representative; and he forces us, under
the most adverse circumstances to hunt for gold, and not improbably to
humiliate ourselves in time of need, by an application to the hoarding
Russian.

We entreat the public attention to the fact, that the banking system and
mode of circulation suggested by the elder Sir Robert Peel, is in fact
precisely that which was followed out by the Scottish banks, without
failure, without complaint, and with incalculable advantage to the
country, before the late premier commenced his wanton interference with
our institutions. Heaven only knows what amount of suffering we must
undergo until the public mind is thoroughly roused to the evils which
have resulted from a weak and imbecile confidence in the nostrums of a
theoretical minister, and until the money trade is freed from its
present most odious restrictions. But we cannot, and we think we ought
not, to conceal our conviction that the present monetary crisis is
directly owing to the Restriction Act, and that the whole empire, and
Scotland in particular, has reason to curse the hour when Sir Robert
Peel thought fit to embark on his financial crusade.

We are glad to see such men as Mr Baring and Mr Newdegate protesting in
the lower House, against the iniquity of the present system, and
exposing its operations in detail. It is in vain that the Chancellor of
the Exchequer--whose deference to the opinions of Sir Robert Peel is so
ludicrously displayed--attempts to raise his voice in defence of
restriction, and to attribute to other causes the deficiency which he
cannot deny. Even Peel himself, as we have already remarked, is fain to
blink the question, and to escape from the attacks of his antagonists,
by the stale artifice of confounding and contrasting their opinions. The
memorable debate in the House of Commons on the 10th of May, has, if we
are not widely mistaken, established a principle which must lead to
important party results; and we would earnestly beseech those who have
the welfare of their country at heart, to make this matter of the
currency a leading consideration in the use of their electoral
franchise.

We have already shown the manner in which Sir Robert Peel was pleased to
treat the respectful remonstrance of the English bankers, and the total
variance of his financial views from those which were entertained by his
excellent and honoured parent. We now take leave to draw the attention
of our readers to a rather remarkable passage in Mr Alison’s late
pamphlet, entitled “_England in 1815 and 1845_.”

We need hardly state our reasons for declining to criticise that work.
We agree entirely with the views entertained by that eminent writer; and
we should be happy indeed, could we state our own arguments with a force
and a precision at all commensurate with his. Sir Robert Peel, however,
in the course of the year 1845, thought proper to make this pamphlet the
subject of his remarks, and concluded, _more suo_, with a sneer at Mr
Alison, which, apart from its propriety, does not strike us as
particularly clever. The point at issue was rather a trivial one; for
Sir Robert, as usual, did not apply himself to the main body of the
argument: he neither impeached the facts nor the conclusions of Mr
Alison, but fastened upon an incidental point of no great value or
importance. The attack, however, had this good effect, that it elicited
a reply from Mr Alison, in which he points out so distinctly the results
of the restrictive measure, that we cannot do better than transfer an
extract from his Postscript to our pages. It is proper to observe, that
this Postscript was published _two years ago_, and we leave the public
to judge of the accuracy of M. Alison’s observations:--

“Whoever,” says he, referring to the Banking Act of the preceding
year--"whoever considers these provisions with attention, will see that
they practically introduce two things: 1st, A limitation of the issue of
Bank of England notes to £14,000,000 on securities, with the addition of
the specie and bullion transferred to the issue department:--2d, A
limitation of any further issue to the amount of such securities,
bullion and specie. It is the avowed object of the Act to base the
circulation of the bank on these three things. And the opinion of its
supporters has been repeatedly expressed that they constitute the only
safe foundation of banking operations. If, therefore, the specie is
drawn out by the holders of notes who are declared entitled by the Act
to have their notes paid at £3, 17s. 10½d. an ounce of gold, it follows,
of course, that the notes in circulation must be diminished in the same
proportion. They cannot issue notes beyond the £14,000,000, _except in
exchange for specie or bullion_--the most effectual of all ways for
limiting the issue to their amount.

"_Now, suppose a bad harvest, such as we have narrowly escaped, occurs,
when undertakings of a gigantic nature are on foot, and a large quantity
of specie is drawn from the bank to purchase foreign grain or other
subsistence, what, under the existing law, must be the consequence?_
Must it not be that the paper circulation of the Bank of England and of
course of every other bank, will be simultaneously and rapidly
contracted? Their own notes pour in to be exchanged for specie to buy
foreign grain, or make the necessary remittances to foreign
undertakings. They cannot issue new ones beyond the £14,000,000, except
in exchange for specie or bullion, which is the very thing they are
every day losing, and which is bought up in all parts of the country for
foreign exportation. The result is inevitable, that their notes must be
called in as rapidly as the sovereigns go out. The screw must be put on;
the circulation must, at all hazards, be contracted. If £10,000,000 of
sovereigns are _drawn out_ to buy foreign grain, or to meet a demand for
gold in foreign states, £10,000,000 worth of notes must be _drawn in_ to
equalise the paper with the stock of gold and silver above the
£14,000,000 authorised to be issued on paper securities. _The
circulation will thus be diminished by £20,000,000, or nearly a third of
its amount_, and that at the very time when the public interests most
loudly call for its extension.

“That may occur, too, at a time when speculations the most weighty are
on foot, and the currency previously in circulation is most required for
the wants of the community! The evil will not thereby be doubled: it
will be quadrupled. Like all mischievous panics, its effects will go on
as the squares. Is it possible to contemplate such a state of things
without the most serious apprehensions: without deep regret that it
should be established and perpetuated by acts of parliament? Does it not
annul the best effects of a paper currency, that of having an elastic
quality which causes it to expand when the metallic currency is
contracted, and so obviate the ruinous and lasting effects of such
temporary diminution on general credit? Is it surprising, when such is
the law, that the mercantile classes watch the sky; that rain for a
month in autumn gives a serious shock to credit, and that stock of all
kinds rises or falls with the changes of the barometer? The Banker’s Act
of 1844 should be styled--‘An Act for the more effectual transferring of
panics from agriculture to commerce, and for perpetuating commercial
catastrophes in Great Britain.’”

When we compare the events predicted in this remarkable passage with
those which have actually taken place--when we reflect that a bad
harvest _has_ occurred, that our gold _has_ been drained, our paper
circulation contracted, and the screw put on--we think there are few
commercial men in the country who will not agree with us in wishing that
Sir Robert Peel had really accepted Mr Alison “as the philosopher who is
to instruct us on the currency.” For, most assuredly, there is no kind
of philosophy which we can discover in the scheme that is now being
tested at the expense of the merchants and manufacturers of the three
kingdoms; unless it should be held philosophic that the whole commercial
machinery of the country shall be exposed to annual dislocation, and
that credit shall hereafter be liable to the present alarming point of
contraction. Parliament, as we understand, is about to separate, without
doing any thing whatever to remedy this monster grievance. Let the Whigs
look to it. They are now to all intents and purposes the aiders and
abettors of Sir Robert Peel. They hang upon his words, adopt his
principles, and applaud his maxims to the skies. They hear from every
quarter of the country the cry of unparalleled distress. An evil much
greater than the scarcity is pressing upon the industrious classes,
interfering with labour, checking trade, and depreciating the value of
every kind of property. Manchester has been nearly at a stand-still, not
from want of orders but from absolute want of accommodation; and yet the
present ministry have neither the courage nor the capacity to step
forward and afford that relief which is in their power, and which the
nation is demanding at their hands. If, during the recess, and before a
new parliament shall meet, the present lamentable state of matters is to
continue, we say deliberately that no British ministry ever exposed
themselves to such a frightful load of responsibility. Let them share it
with their new ally and master. It may be that he intends, at some
future time, to make a second push for popularity by throwing them
overboard, and repealing his own most mischievous statute. But we trust
that the electors throughout the country will take care that the new
representative body shall not be constructed of the same malleable
materials as its predecessor, and that no more experiments, involving
the national prosperity and fortunes, shall be permitted, for the mere
sake of gratifying the caprice and augmenting the vanity of an
individual who has already brought the whole of us so close upon the
verge of ruin.